<pre>
  BIP: ?
  Layer: Applications
  Title: Mnemonic Descriptor
  Author: bg002h <bcg@pm.me>
  Comments-Summary: No comments yet.
  Comments-URI: https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/wiki/Comments:BIP-XXXX
  Status: Draft
  Type: Standards Track
  Created: 2026-04-26
  License: CC0-1.0
</pre>

==Abstract==

This BIP defines the '''Mnemonic Descriptor''' (MD) format: an encoding for bitcoin wallet policies that is compact, error-correcting, and designed for hand-transcription onto durable media (paper, steel). Where BIP 39 standardizes the mnemonic encoding of HD seed entropy, MD standardizes the analogous encoding for the ''wallet structure'' — the BIP 388 wallet policy template, derivation paths, and (when needed) foreign extended public keys — such that the structural information necessary to reconstruct a wallet can survive independently of any digital archive.

The format consists of three layers: (a) a compact bytecode for BIP 380 output descriptors and BIP 388 wallet policies, extending the tag-based encoding pioneered by the public-domain <code>descriptor-codec</code> project; (b) a codex32-derived (BIP 93) encoding layer that reuses the bech32 alphabet and BCH error-correction polynomials but introduces a new human-readable part, header structure, and multi-string chunking for arbitrary-length payloads; and (c) BCH substitution-error correction over each string (up to 4 character substitutions), with an OPTIONAL structure-guided recovery flow (future work) for damage beyond the BCH substitution limit.

==Motivation==

Bitcoin self-custody best practices require backing up the keys that control a wallet's funds. For wallets that use single-key or standard-path structures, BIP 39 provides a robust mnemonic backup: a 12- or 24-word phrase, typically engraved on metal, from which keys can be deterministically reconstructed when paired with the assumed standard derivation path.

This works for "vanilla" wallets, where the wallet structure (single-sig, BIP 44/49/84/86 path) is essentially conventional. For wallets with arbitrary spending policies expressed in miniscript — multisig, timelocks, decaying conditions, inheritance schemes — the policy structure itself becomes essential information that must be backed up, and the seed alone is insufficient. BIP 388 makes this explicit: a wallet policy that is not commonly understood "must be backed up alongside the seed... the recovery of the wallet would not be possible without it."

Existing approaches to policy backup are inadequate for the durable, engravable, decades-of-storage use case that BIP 39 mnemonics solve for seeds:

* '''JSON exports''' (Sparrow, Specter): not engravable; opaque to humans; verbose
* '''Encrypted descriptor files''' (Liana <code>.bed</code> format): not engravable; require digital infrastructure and the encryption password to decode; not human-readable
* '''Multisig configuration files''' (Coldcard, others): plaintext but several hundred bytes; multisig-only; no error correction
* '''Output descriptor strings''' (BIP 380 plain text): long; only a hash-based checksum suffix; not designed for hand transcription; embedding raw xpubs makes engraving impractical
* '''Bytewords / UR''' (Blockchain Commons): word-encoded and supports descriptors, but only CRC32 error detection (no correction); designed for QR transmission rather than engraved metal

What is missing is a format with the same robustness profile as BIP 39 — engravable, hand-transcribable, error-correcting, easily verified — but for ''wallet structure'' rather than seed entropy. This BIP defines that format.

MD is intentionally not a key-backup format. Seed phrases (BIP 39, SLIP 39) and codex32 (BIP 93) handle key material. MD handles the complementary problem: the policy template that connects keys into a wallet.

==Definitions and notation==

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119 RFC 2119].

The following terms are used throughout this document:

* '''Wallet policy''' — a BIP 388 wallet policy: a wallet descriptor template plus an ordered key information vector.
* '''Template''' — the BIP 388 wallet descriptor template: a script structure containing <code>@i</code> placeholders in place of keys, with each placeholder followed by a derivation path expression.
* '''Placeholder''' (<code>@i</code>) — a numeric reference (e.g., <code>@0</code>, <code>@1</code>) inside a template that resolves to a specific key information entry.
* '''Key information''' — a serialized BIP 32 extended public key (xpub) prefixed with origin information of the form <code>[fingerprint/path]xpub</code>, as defined in BIP 388.
* '''Foreign xpub''' — an xpub belonging to the policy that is ''not'' derivable from any seed the user holds (typically a cosigner's key).
* '''Owned seed''' — a BIP 39, SLIP 39, codex32, or other seed for which the user has the recovery material.
* '''Template Card''' — an MD-encoded backup of a wallet's template, derivation paths, and (optionally) master fingerprints. Always required.
* '''Xpub Card''' — an MD-encoded backup of one foreign xpub with its origin information. Required only when the policy contains foreign xpubs (the standalone Xpub Card type is deferred to v1+).
* '''Codex32''' — the BIP 93 encoding for hand-transcribed bitcoin secrets. MD reuses codex32's bech32 alphabet and BCH polynomials.
* '''bech32 alphabet''' — the 32-character set defined in BIP 173: <code>qpzry9x8gf2tvdw0s3jn54khce6mua7l</code>.
* '''Canonical bytecode''' — the deterministic byte sequence produced by encoding a given wallet policy under the MD bytecode rules. Round-trip identity: <code>decode(encode(policy)) == policy</code> in canonical form. Uniqueness is a consequence of the canonicalization rules stated normatively elsewhere in this document — ascending placeholder-index renumbering (§"Round-trip canonical form"), minimal-length LP4-ext varints (§"LP4-ext varint"), the shared-vs-divergent origin-path mode selection (§"Origin path declaration"), and ascending-tag ordering of TLV entries including preserved unknown TLVs (§"TLV section") — not an independent axiom.
* '''Chunk''' — one of one or more codex32-derived strings that together encode a single Template Card.

Bytes are written in hexadecimal as <code>0xNN</code>. Byte sequences are concatenated left-to-right in the order written. The bytecode layer is a packed bit stream (see §"Bytecode layer / General structure"); fixed-width bit fields are MSB-first, and variable-length integer fields use the LP4-ext varint encoding defined in §"LP4-ext varint". All character positions in encoded strings are 0-indexed.

==Format overview==

An MD backup of a wallet consists of one or more cards, where each card is a string of bech32 characters that can be engraved, transcribed, or otherwise stored on durable media. There are three card types:

# '''Template Card''' (this BIP, v0): encodes the wallet's template, derivation paths, and optional master fingerprints. Always required. May span one or more chunks.
# '''Xpub Card''' (deferred to v1+): encodes one foreign xpub with origin information. One per foreign xpub. Not specified in v0.
# '''Policy ID''' (optional): a short identifier derived from the wallet policy (the <code>WalletPolicyId</code>; see §"Policy identifier"), used for cross-verifying digital copies of the policy against the engraved Template Card. May be stamped separately.

The v0.30 specification scope (this document) covers wallets where the user holds every seed referenced by the policy. Per-<code>@i</code> derivation-path divergence — distinct origin and/or use-site paths per placeholder — '''is''' supported via the divergent-paths header flag (§"Origin path declaration") and the per-<code>@N</code> override TLVs, and on-card cosigner/foreign xpubs '''are''' supported via the TLV section (tags 0x00–0x03; carrying an xpub promotes the card to BIP 388 wallet-policy mode). Only the standalone '''Xpub Card''' type — a separate card encoding one foreign xpub with its own origin, one per xpub — remains deferred to a future version. Wallets meeting these criteria require only a Template Card.

''See §"Top-level descriptor scope" for the normative allow-list and §"Frequently Asked Questions" for design choices.''

Forward compatibility is preserved: MD v0 readers MUST reject backups marked with newer version bytes (loud failure), and MD v1+ readers MUST accept v0 Template Cards (graceful upgrade).

==Top-level descriptor scope==

MD is a recovery-first format: its decoder accepts the full BIP 388 top-level
surface so that any card a user may have engraved can be read back (see
"Permissive decode" below). The primary, modern top-level descriptor templates
— the shapes MD is designed around, and for which encoders emit no advisory —
are:

* '''<code>wpkh(KEY)</code>''' — BIP 84 native-segwit single-sig.
* '''<code>wsh(SCRIPT)</code>''' — native-segwit script (multisig and miniscript
  script trees per BIP 388 wallet-policy grammar).
* '''<code>sh(wpkh(KEY))</code>''' — BIP 49 nested-segwit single-sig.
* '''<code>sh(wsh(SCRIPT))</code>''' — BIP 48/1' nested-segwit multisig. The
  inner SCRIPT is subject to the same constraints as a top-level <code>wsh</code>.
* '''<code>tr(KEY)</code>''' or '''<code>tr(KEY, TREE)</code>''' — BIP 86
  taproot: keypath-only, single-leaf, or multi-leaf script tree. <code>TREE</code>
  may be a single tap-leaf script or a recursively nested script tree using the
  <code>TapTree (0x05)</code> inner-node tag, subject to BIP 341's
  <code>TAPROOT_CONTROL_MAX_NODE_COUNT = 128</code> depth ceiling. See
  §"Taproot tree" for the bytecode form. Active (v0.5).

Decoders MAY derive addresses for any of the above accepted shapes by
translating the wire AST to a BIP-380 descriptor and delegating script-
and address-construction to a BIP-380 implementation
(e.g. <code>rust-miniscript</code>'s <code>Descriptor::at_derivation_index</code>
+ <code>Descriptor::address</code>). The reference implementation
(<code>md-codec</code>) follows this approach as of v0.32; the wire format
does not itself prescribe an address-derivation algorithm beyond the
BIP-380/BIP-388 semantics inherited via the AST encoding.

MD additionally decodes the remaining BIP-388-permitted top-level forms, so a
recovery tool can read any legitimately-engraved card:

* '''<code>pkh(KEY)</code>''' — legacy P2PKH single-sig. Fully supported: it is
  the BIP 44 default and ships in the reference test corpus (<code>pkh_basic</code>).
* '''<code>sh(multi(K, ...))</code>''', '''<code>sh(sortedmulti(K, ...))</code>''',
  '''<code>sh(KEY)</code>''' — legacy P2SH. Decoded for recovery; the encoder
  emits an advisory (see "Encode-time advisory" below).

The only genuinely-rejected top-level form is:

* '''<code>bare(SCRIPT)</code>''' — pre-2014 raw script (no address; BIP 388 also
  excludes it). It has no allocated top-level tag; the reference encoder rejects
  it at the parse layer.

=====Permissive decode=====

A conformant decoder's root-tag allow-list is
<code>{sh, wsh, wpkh, pkh, tr}</code>. A wire whose root tag is outside this set
is rejected with <code>Error::OperatorContextViolation { context: TopLevel }</code>.
Inside a top-level <code>sh(...)</code>, the decoder does '''not''' peek-and-reject
the inner tag: <code>sh</code> may wrap <code>wpkh</code> (BIP 49 nested-segwit
single-sig), <code>wsh</code> (BIP 48/1' nested-segwit multisig), or a legacy
<code>multi</code>/<code>sortedmulti</code> body (legacy P2SH multisig) — all
decode. This is a deliberate recovery-safety choice: refusing to decode a
legacy form would strand funds for a user who engraved it. Reserved-tag values
(<code>Error::TagOutOfRange</code>), forbidden tap-leaf tags
(<code>Error::ForbiddenTapTreeLeaf</code>, §"Taproot tree"), and over-depth
recursion (<code>Error::DecodeRecursionDepthExceeded</code>) are still rejected;
each rejection is distinguishable from generic checksum failure and from generic
bytecode-parse failure so conformance suites can pin the error path.

=====Encode-time advisory=====

Because MD decodes the legacy forms, the safety signal moves to encode time.
Encoders SHOULD emit a warn-only advisory to stderr when asked to encode a
top-level legacy P2SH multisig (<code>sh(multi(...))</code> or
<code>sh(sortedmulti(...))</code>): third-party txid malleability, the ~520-byte
redeemScript ceiling, no witness discount, and the address-prefix footgun
described in §"Frequently Asked Questions: Why does MD warn on legacy P2SH
multisig?". The advisory does not change the card: stdout still carries the
encoded string. <code>pkh</code> and all modern forms
(<code>wpkh</code>/<code>wsh</code>/<code>tr</code>/<code>sh(wpkh)</code>/<code>sh(wsh)</code>)
encode silently.

All accepted forms follow the existing canonical form rules (no whitespace,
<code>/**</code> expansion, ascending placeholder order, <code>'</code> for
hardened). No type-specific canonicalization.

===Sh wrapper inner shapes===

When a decoder consumes a top-level <code>sh</code> bytecode tag
(primary code <code>0x03</code>), the inner bytecode tag classifies the
descriptor:

{| class="wikitable"
|+ Tag values are 6-bit primary codes per the v0.30 bytecode wire format (see §"Tag table").
! Inner tag !! Inner type !! Classification
|-
| <code>0x00</code> || <code>wpkh</code> || BIP 49 nested-segwit single-sig
|-
| <code>0x02</code> || <code>wsh</code> || BIP 48/1' nested-segwit multisig
|-
| <code>0x06</code>/<code>0x07</code> || <code>multi</code>/<code>sortedmulti</code> || legacy P2SH multisig (encode-time advisory per §"Top-level descriptor scope")
|-
| Any other || any other || decoded structurally; classified per the inner operator
|}

The reference decoder does not gate the inner tag: every <code>sh(...)</code>
shape that parses is decoded (permissive decode, §"Top-level descriptor scope").
Hostile deeply-nested inputs (e.g., <code>sh(sh(sh(...)))</code> of arbitrary
depth) are bounded not by an sh-specific peek but by the general recursion
depth gate, which rejects trees exceeding
<code>MAX_DECODE_DEPTH = 128</code> with
<code>Error::DecodeRecursionDepthExceeded</code> (§"Taproot tree").

===Elided origins and canonical-default paths===

When an origin path is not supplied explicitly, an encoder MAY '''elide''' it by
writing a depth-0 origin (the 4-bit zero-depth field of §"origin-path-encoding").
A depth-0 origin does '''not''' mean "derive at the master node <code>m</code>":
it is a signal to resolve the derivation path from the ''canonical-origin table''
keyed on the top-level wrapper shape.

{| class="wikitable"
! Wrapper shape !! Canonical origin !! Reference
|-
| <code>pkh(@N)</code> single-key || <code>m/44'/0'/0'</code> || BIP 44 (P2PKH)
|-
| <code>wpkh(@N)</code> single-key || <code>m/84'/0'/0'</code> || BIP 84 (P2WPKH)
|-
| <code>sh(wpkh(@N))</code> single-key || <code>m/49'/0'/0'</code> || BIP 49 (P2SH-P2WPKH)
|-
| <code>tr(@N)</code> key-path only (no TapTree) || <code>m/86'/0'/0'</code> || BIP 86 (P2TR)
|-
| <code>wsh(multi(...))</code> / <code>wsh(sortedmulti(...))</code> || <code>m/48'/0'/0'/2'</code> || BIP 48 P2WSH
|-
| <code>sh(wsh(multi(...)))</code> / <code>sh(wsh(sortedmulti(...)))</code> || <code>m/48'/0'/0'/1'</code> || BIP 48 P2SH-P2WSH
|}

This table reproduces the reference implementation's canonical-origin map
(<code>crates/md-codec/src/canonical_origin.rs</code>), which is the single source
of truth. '''A decoder MUST resolve a depth-0 origin, on any wrapper shape listed
in this table, through the corresponding canonical origin before deriving keys.'''
Deriving at the literal master node instead would recover the wrong wallet. Most
of the reference test corpus — and hence this BIP's §"Test Vectors" table —
carries an elided (depth-0) origin resolved this way.

An '''explicit''' origin — a non-zero-depth path written out via the
depth-prefixed §"origin-path-encoding" — is equally legal, and for a wrapper in
the table MUST resolve to the same keys as the elided form. Encoders MAY emit
either form; a change of origin (e.g. a different account index) is written
explicitly. A per-<code>@N</code> origin that differs from the wrapper default is
carried in the <code>OriginPathOverrides</code> TLV (tag <code>0x03</code>,
§"TLV section").

'''Shapes with no canonical entry.''' A top-level shape with no row in the table
above — <code>tr</code> with a script tree, legacy <code>sh(sortedmulti)</code> /
<code>sh(multi)</code>, a bare <code>wsh(@N)</code> / <code>sh(@N)</code>, or an
arbitrary miniscript body — cannot resolve a depth-0 (elided) origin from the
table. Pathless / non-canonical backup handling for these shapes is under
separate design; the current reference decoder rejects an elided origin on such a
wrapper with <code>Error::MissingExplicitOrigin { idx }</code>, requiring an
explicit origin for every <code>@N</code> (supplied via the origin path
declaration or an <code>OriginPathOverrides</code> entry).

==Specification==

===Encoding layer===

A single MD string is structured as:

<pre>
  <HRP> <separator> <header> <payload> <checksum>
</pre>

Each component is described below.

====Human-readable part====

The HRP is the two-character string <code>md</code> (lowercase) or <code>MD</code> (uppercase). HRP case MUST match the case of the data part. Mixed case within a single string is invalid and MUST be rejected.

Note: The chosen HRP is subject to formal SLIP-0173 registration (see FOLLOWUPS entry <code>slip-0173-register-md-hrp</code>). It was collision-vetted prior to adoption (see §"Why a new HRP?"). Implementations MUST use <code>md</code> until otherwise specified.

====Separator====

The separator is the single character <code>1</code>, following BIP 173 bech32 convention. The separator is excluded from the bech32 data alphabet and unambiguously marks the boundary between HRP and data.

====Header====

Each MD card's data part begins with a header that identifies the card mode, version, and (for chunked cards) reassembly information. The header is bit-packed at the front of the data part. Single-payload and chunked layouts are discriminated '''in-band''': decoders auto-dispatch on bit 0 of the first 5-bit symbol (the <code>chunked</code> flag), with no caller hint. Single-payload headers carry <code>chunked = 0</code>; chunk headers carry <code>chunked = 1</code>. See §"Auto-dispatch and v0.x rejection" below for the discrimination trace.

For '''single-string Template Cards''' (the common case for small wallets), the header is 5 bits (one bech32 character) and matches the bytecode-layer payload header described in §"Bytecode header":

* Bit 4: divergent-paths flag.
* Bits 3–0: version (v0.30 = <code>0b0100</code> = 4). The 4-bit field absorbs the bit that v0.x reserved.

For '''chunked Template Cards''', the header is 37 bits. It is '''contiguous''' with the fragment that follows: the header does not pad up to a symbol boundary, so bits 37–39 of the eighth 5-bit symbol are already the first fragment bits (see §"Chunk fragment"). The 37 header bits are:

* Bits 36–33: version (v0.30 = <code>0b0100</code>). 4-bit field.
* Bit 32: chunked flag, MUST be <code>1</code>. This is the bit-0 discriminator of the first 5-bit symbol; auto-dispatch sees it before any other field.
* Bits 31–12: chunk-set identifier (CSI), 20 bits. A deterministic per-encoding identifier shared by all chunks of one Template Card, derived from the encoding's <code>Md1EncodingId</code> (defined immediately below). Used to detect chunks from different Template Cards being mixed during reassembly.
* Bits 11–6: total chunk count, 6 bits, encoded as <code>count − 1</code>. Range <code>1..64</code>. The count is fixed by the normative sizing formula in §"Chunking" (<code>count = ⌈padded_payload_bits / 320⌉</code>); encoders MUST NOT vary it.
* Bits 5–0: chunk index, 6 bits, 0-indexed. Range <code>0..(count − 1)</code>.

The chunk-set identifier is normatively bound to the canonical encoding. Define <code>Md1EncodingId</code> as the leading 16 bytes of <code>SHA-256</code> over the canonical bit-packed payload bytecode of the Template Card — the bytecode produced by the encoder for the assembled (single-string-equivalent) payload (see §"Payload" and §"Bytecode layer"). Encoders MUST derive <code>chunk_set_id</code> from <code>Md1EncodingId</code> by taking the leading 20 bits, MSB-first:

<pre>
  chunk_set_id = (Md1EncodingId[0] << 12) | (Md1EncodingId[1] << 4) | (Md1EncodingId[2] >> 4)
</pre>

This deterministic binding makes md1 encoding bit-reproducible — any two conforming encoders given the same canonical bytecode produce identical Template Card strings — and lets downstream toolchains SHA-pin regression corpora. Decoders MUST verify, after reassembly and bytecode decode, that the wire <code>chunk_set_id</code> matches the value derived from the reassembled encoding's <code>Md1EncodingId</code>; mismatch MUST be rejected with an error specifically identifying the chunk-set-id derivation check. The reference implementation surfaces this as <code>Error::ChunkSetIdMismatch { expected, derived }</code>.

<code>Md1EncodingId</code> is the hash of the '''raw bit-packed payload bytecode''' and serves solely as the chunk-set-identifier source. It is a '''distinct value''' from the engraved policy anchor <code>WalletPolicyId</code> (§"Policy identifier"), which is hashed over a different, canonical-expanded wallet-policy preimage (template tree bits plus per-<code>@N</code> origin / use-site / fingerprint / xpub records — '''not''' the raw payload). The two are computed over different preimages; neither is a truncation of the other. See §"Policy identifier" for the anchor's construction.

'''Naming note:''' the field was called "wallet identifier" in MD versions ≤ 0.8.x. The v0.8 "wallet ID" → "Policy ID" rename mechanically renamed this chunk-header field to ''ChunkPolicyId'' as collateral, but on review for the sibling Mnemonic Key (MK) format that name was misleading: the chunk-header field is neither the policy anchor (§"Policy identifier") nor a per-instance identity — it identifies a chunk-set assembly and nothing more. v0.9 corrects the name to "chunk-set identifier" / <code>chunk_set_id</code>. Wire format and bit layout are unchanged across the v0.8 → v0.9 rename.

=====Auto-dispatch and safe rejection=====

Decoders dispatch between single-payload and chunked layouts by reading bit 0 of the first 5-bit symbol:

* <code>bit 0 = 0</code> → single-payload mode; the first symbol is <code>[paths (bit 4)][v3 (bit 3)][v2 (bit 2)][v1 (bit 1)][v0 (bit 0)]</code> — bit 4 is the divergent-<code>paths</code> flag, bits 3..1 are the version's high bits (v3, v2, v1), and bit 0 is the version's low bit <code>v0 = 0</code>.
* <code>bit 0 = 1</code> → chunked mode; treat bits 4..1 as the 4-bit version field, consume 32 more bits as chunk-header continuation.

The 4-bit version field has 16 representable values but the auto-dispatch constrains the usable subset: redesigned wire-format versions MUST have <code>v0 = 0</code> (even values), because <code>v0 = 1</code> would be mis-classified as chunked. Additionally <code>version = 0</code> collides with v0.x single-payload, and <code>version = 2</code> collides with v0.x chunked (which a v0.30 decoder reads as single-payload with version=2 — see below). The usable v0.30-family WF-redesign version set is therefore '''{4, 8, 12}'''. v0.30 uses <code>version = 4</code>; future major breaks would use 8 then 12.

v0.x payloads are rejected cleanly without silent mis-decode. The auto-dispatch trace:

{| class="wikitable"
! Input !! First 5 bits !! Decoder verdict
|-
| v0.x single-payload (version=0) || <code>[paths][0][0][0][0]</code> || bit 0 = 0 → single-payload; version = 0 → <code>Error::WireVersionMismatch { got: 0 }</code>
|-
| v0.x chunked (version=0, chunked=1) || <code>[0][0][0][1][0]</code> || bit 0 = 0 → single-payload; version = 2 → <code>Error::WireVersionMismatch { got: 2 }</code>
|-
| v0.30 single-payload || <code>[paths][0][1][0][0]</code> || bit 0 = 0 → single-payload; version = 4 → accepted
|-
| v0.30 chunked || <code>[0][1][0][0][1]</code> || bit 0 = 1 → chunked; version = 4 → accepted
|-
| v0.30 chunked read WITHOUT dispatch (non-conforming decoder routes it through the single-payload header) || <code>[0][1][0][0][1]</code> || bits 3–0 read as a single-payload version = <code>1001</code> = 9 → <code>Error::WireVersionMismatch { got: 9 }</code> — the misleading mis-parse that auto-dispatch prevents
|}

In-band auto-dispatch is '''normative''' (Decoder requirements #3, §"Decoder requirements"): a conformant decoder MUST read bit 0 of the first 5-bit symbol before interpreting any other field, and dispatch single-payload vs chunked on it — never by caller role. A decoder that skips this step and feeds a chunked string to the single-payload header path surfaces the misleading <code>got 9</code> error in the last row above. The reference <code>md decode</code> performs the bit-0 dispatch and reads single-string and chunked cards through the same entry point.

====Payload====

The payload is the canonical bit-packed bytecode (defined in §"Bytecode layer", below) of the Template Card, encoded directly as 5-bit codex32 symbols. For chunked Template Cards, each chunk's payload is a fragment of the assembled bytecode: the assembled payload is byte-padded (zero-padded to a whole-byte boundary) and split into '''whole-byte''' fragments, one per chunk. See §"Chunking" for the byte-aligned framing.

The bytecode is bit-packed (MSB-first); 5-bit symbols are emitted directly from the bit stream with no intermediate byte-aligned conversion. The final symbol may carry up to 4 bits of trailing zero padding to align the bit count with the codex32 symbol grid.

Decoders MUST reject an MD card whose '''assembled bytecode stream''' carries non-zero trailing padding bits. Because the bytecode is bit-packed and the codex32 layer emits 5-bit symbols, a conforming encoder leaves up to 7 trailing bits of '''zero''' padding after the last bytecode field (≤4 bits from the 5-bit symbol grid, plus the byte-boundary pad), tolerated at the TLV-section boundary via the rollback-as-padding mechanism (§"TLV section / End-of-section detection"). Those ≤7 rollback bits MUST be zero: a conforming encoder never emits non-zero padding, so a decoder MUST reject an assembled stream whose trailing rollback bits are non-zero rather than silently accept it. The reference implementation surfaces this rejection as <code>Error::&lt;PAD_ERROR_VARIANT_TBD_P2&gt;</code> — the exact variant name is finalized in the implementation phase — and cross-implementations MUST surface a semantically equivalent rejection, distinguishable from generic checksum failure and from generic bytecode-parse failure, so conformance tests can pin the error path. (This check applies to the '''reassembled''' bytecode stream. The ≤4 bits of per-chunk symbol-alignment padding that each chunked string carries after its fragment are discarded during reassembly (§"Reassembly") and are not conformance-checked; a conforming encoder emits them as zero.)

====Checksum====

The checksum is computed using a BCH error-correcting code with HRP-mixing applied in the BIP 173 style. The polymod algorithm is BIP 93's <code>ms32_polymod</code>, applied to the concatenation of:

# The HRP-expansion of <code>"md"</code>, computed exactly as in BIP 173 §"Bech32": for each HRP character <code>c</code> emit <code>ord(c) >> 5</code>; emit a single zero; for each HRP character emit <code>ord(c) & 31</code>. For the lowercase HRP <code>"md"</code> this yields the five 5-bit values <code>[3, 3, 0, 13, 4]</code> (length = 2 × len(HRP) + 1 = 5). Derivation: <code>ord('m') = 109 = 0x6d; 109 >> 5 = 3; 109 & 31 = 13</code>. <code>ord('d') = 100 = 0x64; 100 >> 5 = 3; 100 & 31 = 4</code>. The separator zero falls between the high-half list <code>[3, 3]</code> and the low-half list <code>[13, 4]</code>.
# The data part: header + payload as a sequence of 5-bit values from the bech32 alphabet.
# A pad of 13 zero values during encoding, or the actual 13-symbol checksum during verification.

An MD string is valid when <code>polymod(input) == T_REGULAR</code>:

* '''Regular code''' (BCH(93,80,8)): the only MD code. Checksum length is 13 symbols. <code>T_REGULAR = 0x0815c07747a3392e7</code> (65 bits).

The 93-symbol length is a bound on the '''data part''' — header + payload + the 13-symbol checksum — and '''excludes''' the 3-character HRP-plus-separator prefix, matching BIP 93's data-part accounting. A single string therefore carries at most 80 data symbols (400 payload bits) plus the 13-symbol checksum: a 93-symbol codeword. Payloads exceeding 400 bits MUST be chunked (§"Chunking"); MD has no long code (its removal from the v0.x line is recorded in §"Backwards Compatibility"). The derivation of <code>T_REGULAR</code> is documented in §"Why new target constants?" below.

====Error-correction guarantees====

The regular code (BCH(93,80,8)) guarantees, per single string:

* Detection of any error pattern affecting up to 8 characters.
* '''Correction of up to 4 character substitutions''' (normative; implemented by the reference decoder).

Detection of error patterns affecting more than 8 characters is probabilistic. The expected probability that a randomly damaged string of more than 8 errors decodes to a valid codeword is bounded by approximately 2<sup>−65</sup>.

The code's minimum distance also admits erasure decoding — up to 8 known-position erasures, and longer contiguous bursts (a cyclic <code>n−k</code>-parity argument) — but '''erasure-aware decoding is not implemented by the reference decoder''', which performs substitution-error correction only. Erasure decoding is described in this document as future work (see §"Guided recovery" and FOLLOWUP <code>impl-bch-erasure-decoding-md-mk</code>); the erasure counts above are theoretical properties of the code, not a claim about the current implementation.

Decoders SHOULD report which correction was applied (clean / N substitutions corrected / failed) per §"Decoder reporting".

Substitution correction SHOULD use Berlekamp–Massey to derive the error-locator polynomial and Forney's algorithm to derive error magnitudes, working in the field <code>GF(1024) = GF(32)[ζ] / (ζ² − ζ − P)</code> with primitive element <code>β = G·ζ</code> (order 93). The eight syndromes are computed at <code>{β<sup>77</sup>, …, β<sup>84</sup>}</code>, matching the 8-consecutive-roots window of the generator polynomial as specified in BIP 93 §"Generation of valid checksum". This canonical decoder makes the correction outputs byte-identical across implementations on the same input. Alternative algorithms (e.g., brute-force enumeration up to <code>t = 4</code>) are permitted but MAY produce different but equally-valid corrections when multiple weight-≤ 4 codewords are equidistant from the received word; the canonical decoder breaks ties by ascending position index.

====Alphabet====

The data part (header + payload + checksum) uses the bech32 alphabet:

<pre>
  qpzry9x8gf2tvdw0s3jn54khce6mua7l
</pre>

This is the same 32-character set used by BIP 173 segwit addresses, BIP 350 bech32m, and BIP 93 codex32. The alphabet excludes <code>1</code>, <code>b</code>, <code>i</code>, <code>o</code>, and uppercase variants thereof to avoid common transcription confusables.

====Length envelope====

A codex32 character is one 5-bit symbol from the bech32 alphabet. A Template Card string is the 3-character HRP-plus-separator prefix (<code>md1</code>) followed by the data part: payload symbols plus the 13-symbol BCH checksum. The 93-symbol codeword cap is on the '''data part''' and '''excludes''' the HRP prefix (BIP 93 accounting), so a single string is at most 96 characters (3 + 93).

For a single-string Template Card, the payload is the canonical bit-packed bytecode (5-bit header + origin-path-decl + use-site-path-decl + tree + TLV section), MSB-first, with up to 4 bits of trailing zero padding to align with the 5-bit codex32 symbol grid.

Maximum single-string payload: <code>(93 − 13) × 5 = 400 bits</code> (80 data symbols, ≈ 50 bytes). Payloads above 400 bits MUST be chunked.

For a chunked Template Card, each chunk's data part is the 37-bit chunk header (§"Chunk header") '''immediately followed''' by the chunk's whole-byte fragment (§"Chunk fragment"), packed contiguously into 5-bit symbols (up to 4 bits of trailing zero padding), then the 13-symbol checksum. There is no inter-field slack between the header and the fragment.

Maximum fragment per chunk: the 37-bit header plus the fragment must fit the 80-data-symbol (400-bit) regular-code budget, so at most <code>⌊(400 − 37) / 8⌋ = 45</code> whole bytes (360 bits) of fragment fit per chunk. The reference encoder uses a more conservative per-chunk budget of 320 bits (64 data symbols) to size the chunk count (§"Chunking"), leaving headroom for the 37-bit header. With up to 64 chunks, a Template Card can carry far more assembled payload than any practical wallet policy requires. The v0.30 wire format does NOT carry a separate cross-chunk hash field; cross-chunk integrity is derived from the assembled-payload SHA-256 (see §"Chunking").

===Bytecode layer===

The bytecode is the canonical compact binary encoding of a wallet policy. It is the input to the encoding layer (above) and the output of decoding.

====General structure====

The bytecode is a packed bit stream — a contiguous concatenation of variable-width bit fields with no byte alignment between sections or operators. The bit stream is laid out MSB-first into bytes; the final byte is zero-padded if the total bit count is not a multiple of 8. The trailing zero-padding is also tolerated as up to 7 bits of slack at the TLV-section boundary (see §"TLV section / end-of-section detection") because the codex32 encoding layer emits 5-bit symbols.

A single-string Template Card carries the bytecode in this order:

# Header — 5 bits.
# Origin path declaration — variable.
# Use-site path declaration — variable, always present.
# Tree — variable, recursive.
# TLV section — variable, may be empty.

For chunked Template Cards, each chunk's bit stream begins with a 37-bit chunk header (carrying the chunk-set identifier, total chunk count, and this chunk's index) instead of the 5-bit payload header. The chunked and single-string layouts have distinguishable bit prefixes (see §"Header" and §"Chunking" for the full layouts); dispatch between them is '''in-band''' — a decoder reads bit 0 of the first 5-bit symbol (the chunked flag) and dispatches on it, with no caller hint (§"Auto-dispatch and safe rejection"). After all chunks in a set are reassembled, the joined bit stream begins with the same 5-bit payload header and follows the same five-section layout above. Cross-chunk integrity is via the 20-bit chunk-set identifier carried in every chunk header (derived from the assembled payload's <code>Md1EncodingId</code>); see §"Chunking".

====Bytecode header====

The first 5 bits of the bytecode are the single-payload header:

{| class="wikitable"
! Bit !! Field !! Notes
|-
| 4 || Divergent-paths flag || <code>0</code> = a single shared origin path applies to every <code>@N</code> placeholder; <code>1</code> = one origin path per <code>@N</code> follows in the path declaration.
|-
| 3–0 || Version || 4-bit version field. v0.30 = <code>0b0100</code> (= 4). The 4-bit width absorbs the bit that v0.x reserved. Bit 0 doubles as the auto-dispatch discriminator (must be <code>0</code> for single-payload; see §"Auto-dispatch and safe rejection"). Decoders MUST reject any other value with <code>Error::WireVersionMismatch { got }</code>; the future-usable WF-redesign set is <code>{4, 8, 12}</code> per the auto-dispatch constraint.
|}

The header occupies the first 5 bits of the bit stream MSB-first; the origin path declaration begins immediately at bit 5 with no padding.

====Origin path declaration====

The origin path declaration encodes the BIP 32 derivation path(s) that produce the xpubs referenced by each <code>@N</code> placeholder. The block dispatches on header bit 4:

{| class="wikitable"
! Mode !! Header bit 4 !! Wire layout
|-
| Shared || <code>0</code> || <code>[n: 5 bits, encoded n−1] [origin-path-encoding]</code>
|-
| Divergent || <code>1</code> || <code>[n: 5 bits, encoded n−1] [origin-path-encoding × n]</code>
|}

''n'' is the descriptor's key count, range <code>1..32</code> (BIP 388 placeholder cap), encoded as <code>n−1</code> in 5 bits. Out-of-range values are rejected with <code>Error::KeyCountOutOfRange { n }</code>. In divergent mode the path encodings appear in placeholder-index order: the first encoding applies to <code>@0</code>, the second to <code>@1</code>, and so on; there is no per-entry index field — position in the list IS the index.

Conforming encoders MUST examine the placeholder paths in placeholder-index order and emit shared mode (header bit 4 = 0) when all paths are equal, divergent mode (header bit 4 = 1) otherwise. This rule is a pure function of policy state; <code>encode(decode(encode(p)))</code> is bit-identical to <code>encode(p)</code>.

=====origin-path-encoding=====

Each origin-path-encoding is:

  <code>[depth: 4 bits] [component × depth]</code>

''depth'' is the number of BIP 32 derivation components in the path, held in a 4-bit field, so the wire cannot represent a depth above 15. This is therefore an '''encoder-side''' constraint: encoders MUST reject paths deeper than 15 before serialization (<code>Error::PathDepthExceeded { got, max: 15 }</code>); a decoder reading this 4-bit field can never observe an out-of-range depth. The cap is defense-in-depth — no real-world BIP path family exceeds 6 components (BIP 48 + change/index = 6); 15 leaves generous headroom.

A depth-<code>0</code> encoding (the 4-bit zero-depth field with no following components) does '''not''' denote deriving at the literal master node <code>m</code>: it marks an '''elided''' origin, resolved through the canonical-origin table for the wrapper shape (§"Elided origins and canonical-default paths"). For a wrapper with no canonical entry, a depth-0 origin is handled per that section.

The v0.30 wire format does not carry a path dictionary; a non-elided origin path is encoded via the depth-prefixed form above, and an elided origin is the depth-0 form resolved via the canonical-origin table. (Historical context: pre-v0.11 versions carried a 1-byte indicator that selected between well-known BIP 44 / 48 / 84 / 86 / 87 paths and an explicit encoding; that mechanism was retired by the v0.11 wire-format reset and has never returned.)

=====component=====

Each component is:

  <code>[hardened: 1 bit] [value: LP4-ext varint]</code>

''hardened'' is the BIP 32 hardened bit. ''value'' is the un-hardened-bit child number, encoded as an LP4-ext varint (see §"LP4-ext varint", below). Component values up to <code>2^29 − 1</code> are representable; larger values are rejected with <code>Error::VarintOverflow { value }</code>.

=====Authority precedence with MK=====

When an MD card with per-<code>@N</code> paths participates in recovery alongside one or more MK cards (xpub backups; see [https://github.com/bg002h/mnemonic-key bg002h/mnemonic-key]), MK's <code>origin_path</code> is '''authoritative''' for the xpub's derivation; MD's per-<code>@N</code> path is '''descriptive''' — the policy's expected path layout. Per-format decoders are not required to be aware of cross-format context; consistency-checking is the recovery orchestrator's responsibility, and mismatch MUST cause the orchestrator to reject the assembly. See MK's BIP §"Authority precedence (MK ↔ MD path information)" for the full normative semantics.

====Use-site path declaration====

Following the origin path declaration is a use-site path declaration that encodes the BIP 388 multipath suffix (e.g. <code>/<0;1>/*</code>) shared by every <code>@N</code> placeholder. It is always present; its minimal form (no multipath, unhardened wildcard) is 2 bits.

  <code>[has-multipath: 1 bit]</code>
  <code>[if has-multipath:</code>
  <code>  [alt-count: 3 bits, encoded count−2; range 2..9]</code>
  <code>  [alternative × count]</code>
  <code>]</code>
  <code>[wildcard-hardened: 1 bit]</code>

''has-multipath'' is <code>1</code> if a parenthesized alternation (<code><a;b;...></code>) precedes the wildcard, <code>0</code> otherwise. ''alt-count'' is the number of alternatives, encoded as <code>count − 2</code> in 3 bits; permitted range is <code>2..9</code> (out-of-range rejected with <code>Error::AltCountOutOfRange { got }</code>). ''wildcard-hardened'' is <code>1</code> if the trailing wildcard is <code>*h</code>, <code>0</code> for <code>*</code>.

=====alternative=====

Each alternative is encoded the same way as a derivation-path component (§"component", above):

  <code>[hardened: 1 bit] [value: LP4-ext varint]</code>

The standard BIP 388 multipath form <code>/<0;1>/*</code> encodes as 16 bits: 1 (multipath present) + 3 (count = 2) + 5 (alt 0: unhardened, value 0) + 6 (alt 1: unhardened, value 1) + 1 (unhardened wildcard).

When a wallet policy needs different multipath suffixes per <code>@N</code>, the shared default declared here is overridden per placeholder by the <code>UseSitePathOverrides</code> TLV entry (see §"TLV section", below).

====Tree operators====

The wallet's script is encoded as a tree of operators. Each bytecode-layer operator is identified by a tag drawn from a '''6-bit primary code space''' (values <code>0x00</code>–<code>0x3F</code>); primary value <code>0x3F</code> is the extension prefix, in which case the next 4 bits carry an extension subcode (0x0–0xF). Primary values <code>0x24</code>–<code>0x3E</code> are reserved for future operator allocations within the semantic ranges of §"Tag table" below. The TLV section is a separate tag space at 5-bit width (see §"TLV tag allocations"); bytecode 6-bit and TLV 5-bit are distinct namespaces. The tag table below reflects the v0.30 wire format. The authoritative source is <code>crates/md-codec/src/tag.rs</code> in the reference implementation; the BIP table mirrors that mapping.

The wire format packs operator tags + their operand bits contiguously without byte alignment between operators (see §"General structure" above for the section ordering and §"Origin path declaration", §"Use-site path declaration", and §"TLV section" for the bit-aligned mechanisms that carry path-decl framing, per-<code>@N</code> origin-path overrides, fingerprints, and xpubs — none of which occupy slots in the operator-tag table below).

=====Tag table=====

Bytecode primary codes occupy a 6-bit space (values <code>0x00</code>–<code>0x3F</code>). Slots <code>0x00</code>–<code>0x23</code> are allocated to the 36 operators below; slots <code>0x24</code>–<code>0x3E</code> are reserved (decoder MUST reject with <code>Error::TagOutOfRange { primary }</code>); slot <code>0x3F</code> is the extension prefix followed by a 4-bit subcode (no extension subcodes are allocated in v0.30 — the entire 16-slot subspace is reserved).

{| class="wikitable"
! Primary !! Operator !! Operator data !! Children !! Disposition
|-
| <code>0x00</code> || <code>wpkh()</code> || <code>key_index</code> (kiw bits) || 0 || Top-level: ACTIVE. As <code>sh(wpkh)</code> inner: ACTIVE.
|-
| <code>0x01</code> || <code>tr()</code> || 1-bit <code>is_nums</code> + (<code>key_index</code> if <code>!is_nums</code>) + 1-bit <code>has_tree</code> + optional tree || 0 (key-only) or 1 (TapTree subtree) || See §"<code>tr()</code> NUMS encoding" for the NUMS flag semantics.
|-
| <code>0x02</code> || <code>wsh()</code> || — || 1 || Top-level: ACTIVE. As <code>sh(wsh)</code> inner: ACTIVE.
|-
| <code>0x03</code> || <code>sh()</code> || — || 1 || Top-level: ACTIVE per §"Sh wrapper inner shapes".
|-
| <code>0x04</code> || <code>pkh()</code> || <code>key_index</code> (kiw bits) || 0 || Top-level: REJECTED. Not used in any nested context in MD's accepted surface.
|-
| <code>0x05</code> || <code>TapTree</code> inner-node || — || 2 (left/right subtree) || Multi-leaf TapTree inner-node framing (taproot script-tree subtree); recursive <code>[TapTree][LEFT_SUBTREE][RIGHT_SUBTREE]</code> (see §"Taproot tree").
|-
| <code>0x06</code> || <code>multi()</code> || 5-bit <code>k−1</code> + 5-bit <code>n−1</code> + n × <code>key_index</code> (kiw bits) || 0 (raw indices, not Nodes) || See §"Operator children layout".
|-
| <code>0x07</code> || <code>sortedmulti()</code> || 5-bit <code>k−1</code> + 5-bit <code>n−1</code> + n × <code>key_index</code> || 0 || As above.
|-
| <code>0x08</code> || <code>multi_a()</code> || 5-bit <code>k−1</code> + 5-bit <code>n−1</code> + n × <code>key_index</code> || 0 (taproot) || As above.
|-
| <code>0x09</code> || <code>sortedmulti_a()</code> || 5-bit <code>k−1</code> + 5-bit <code>n−1</code> + n × <code>key_index</code> || 0 (taproot) || Coldcard + Ledger documented.
|-
| <code>0x0A</code> || <code>pk_k()</code> (BIP-379 sugar <code>pk()</code>) || <code>key_index</code> (kiw bits) || 0 ||
|-
| <code>0x0B</code> || <code>pk_h()</code> (BIP-379 sugar <code>pkh()</code>) || <code>key_index</code> (kiw bits) || 0 ||
|-
| <code>0x0C</code> || <code>c:</code> wrapper (Check) || — || 1 || Walker normalization: never wraps a bare <code>pk_k</code>/<code>pk_h</code> child on the wire; the renderer reconstructs the <code>c:</code> at key-leaf positions. See §"Round-trip canonical form".
|-
| <code>0x0D</code> || <code>v:</code> wrapper (Verify) || — || 1 ||
|-
| <code>0x0E</code> || <code>s:</code> wrapper (Swap) || — || 1 ||
|-
| <code>0x0F</code> || <code>a:</code> wrapper (Alt) || — || 1 ||
|-
| <code>0x10</code> || <code>d:</code> wrapper (DupIf) || — || 1 ||
|-
| <code>0x11</code> || <code>j:</code> wrapper (NonZero) || — || 1 ||
|-
| <code>0x12</code> || <code>n:</code> wrapper (ZeroNotEqual) || — || 1 ||
|-
| <code>0x13</code> || <code>and_v</code> || — || 2 ||
|-
| <code>0x14</code> || <code>and_b</code> || — || 2 ||
|-
| <code>0x15</code> || <code>andor</code> || — || 3 ||
|-
| <code>0x16</code> || <code>or_b</code> || — || 2 ||
|-
| <code>0x17</code> || <code>or_c</code> || — || 2 ||
|-
| <code>0x18</code> || <code>or_d</code> || — || 2 ||
|-
| <code>0x19</code> || <code>or_i</code> || — || 2 ||
|-
| <code>0x1A</code> || <code>thresh()</code> || 5-bit <code>k−1</code> + 5-bit <code>n−1</code> + n × Node || n (full Node children, distinct from multi-family raw-index packing) || See §"Operator children layout".
|-
| <code>0x1B</code> || <code>after()</code> || 32-bit absolute timelock || 0 ||
|-
| <code>0x1C</code> || <code>older()</code> || 32-bit relative timelock || 0 ||
|-
| <code>0x1D</code> || <code>sha256()</code> || 32-byte hash || 0 ||
|-
| <code>0x1E</code> || <code>hash160()</code> || 20-byte hash || 0 ||
|-
| <code>0x1F</code> || <code>hash256()</code> || 32-byte hash || 0 || Promoted to primary in v0.30 (was 0x1F+ext 0x00 in v0.x).
|-
| <code>0x20</code> || <code>ripemd160()</code> || 20-byte hash || 0 || Promoted to primary in v0.30 (was 0x1F+ext 0x01 in v0.x).
|-
| <code>0x21</code> || raw <code>pk_h</code> hash (<code>expr_raw_pkh</code>) || 20-byte hash || 0 || Promoted to primary in v0.30 (was 0x1F+ext 0x02 in v0.x). Reachable via <code>c:</code> wrapper only; type-K bare form. Never produced by md-cli's BIP 388 walker.
|-
| <code>0x22</code> || <code>FALSE</code> (literal <code>0</code>) || — || 0 || Promoted to primary in v0.30 (was 0x1F+ext 0x03 in v0.x).
|-
| <code>0x23</code> || <code>TRUE</code> (literal <code>1</code>) || — || 0 || Promoted to primary in v0.30 (was 0x1F+ext 0x04 in v0.x).
|-
| <code>0x24</code>–<code>0x3E</code> || ''reserved'' || — || — || Reserved for future operators. Decoder rejects with <code>Error::TagOutOfRange { primary }</code>. Semantic sub-ranges per the allocation policy in §"Rationale: tag-space layout".
|-
| <code>0x3F</code> || ''extension prefix'' || 4-bit subcode follows || — || No subcodes allocated in v0.30. The entire 4-bit subspace (16 slots) is reserved; decoder consumes the subcode and rejects with <code>Error::TagOutOfRange { primary: 0x3F }</code>.
|-
|}

''Historical note.'' Pre-v0.11 wire formats carried byte-aligned framing tags <code>Placeholder = 0x33</code>, <code>SharedPath = 0x34</code>, <code>Fingerprints = 0x35</code>, and <code>OriginPaths = 0x36</code> in an 8-bit operator-tag namespace. v0.11 retired all four: path-decl framing moved into the bit-aligned §"Origin path declaration"; key references moved into inline <code>key_index</code> bit fields (§"Key references"); fingerprints, xpubs, and per-<code>@N</code> overrides moved into the §"TLV section". v0.30 retains that split and additionally widens the bytecode primary tag space from 5-bit to 6-bit, promoting 5 operators (Hash256, Ripemd160, RawPkH, False, True) from the v0.x extension subspace to direct primary slots <code>0x1F</code>–<code>0x23</code> for 4-bit-per-occurrence savings.

=====<code>tr()</code> NUMS encoding=====

In <code>tr()</code> (primary tag <code>0x01</code>), the operator body carries a 1-bit <code>is_nums</code> flag at the leading position. When <code>is_nums = 1</code>, the internal key is the BIP-341 §"Constructing and spending Taproot outputs" NUMS H-point — the x-only public key with no known discrete log:

  <code>50929b74c1a04954b78b4b6035e97a5e078a5a0f28ec96d547bfee9ace803ac0</code>

The wire shape is:

  <code>Tag::Tr(6) | is_nums(1) | [key_index(kiw) iff !is_nums] | has_tree(1) | [tree iff has_tree]</code>

When <code>is_nums = 1</code>, <code>key_index</code> is suppressed on the wire entirely (no kiw-bit field follows). When <code>is_nums = 0</code>, a <code>key_index</code> field of width <code>kiw = ⌈log₂(n)⌉</code> follows; values <code>0..n−1</code> reference <code>@i</code> placeholders. Values <code>≥ n</code> are rejected with <code>Error::NUMSSentinelConflict</code> (the field name is historical; the rejection fires for <code>is_nums = 0 ∧ key_index ≥ n</code>).

'''Canonicalization invariant.''' Encoders MUST emit <code>is_nums = 1</code> iff the descriptor's <code>tr()</code> internal key is exactly the BIP-341 NUMS H-point above. Encoders MUST emit <code>is_nums = 0</code> with <code>key_index = i</code> (where <code>0 ≤ i < n</code>) for any <code>@i</code> placeholder internal key.

'''Use cases.''' (1) Threshold/multi-key script-path-only multisig where no single key dominates (e.g. <code>thresh(2,pk(@0),pk(@1),pk(@2))</code> compiles to <code>tr(NUMS, multi_a(2,@0,@1,@2))</code>). (2) Conjunction policies where extraction fails (<code>and(pk(@0),pk(@1))</code> compiles to <code>tr(NUMS, and_v(v:pk(@0),pk(@1)))</code>). (3) Caller-explicit script-path-only spending where key-path extraction is intentionally disabled.

'''History.''' v0.17.0 carried a separate <code>Tag::TrUnspendable</code> at primary <code>0x1F</code> + ext-sub-code <code>0x05</code>; v0.18 retired that tag in favor of a sentinel <code>key_index = n</code> in a widened-by-one kiw field; v0.30 retires the sentinel in favor of the explicit <code>is_nums</code> flag here, which restores the un-widened <code>kiw = ⌈log₂(n)⌉</code> formula (saving 1 bit at each <code>n ∈ {1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32}</code>). The Bare descriptor (<code>bare(SCRIPT)</code>) has no allocated tag — the encoder rejects it at the parse layer per §"Top-level descriptor scope".

=====Operator children layout=====

For fixed-arity operators (wrappers, binary ops, <code>andor</code>, <code>TapTree</code>) child sub-trees follow the operator's body bits in fixed order specified by the miniscript fragment definition.

Variable-arity operators fork by family:

* '''Multi-family''' (<code>multi</code>, <code>sortedmulti</code>, <code>multi_a</code>, <code>sortedmulti_a</code>) — the body is <code>Tag(6) | (k−1)(5) | (n−1)(5) | n × key_index(kiw)</code>. Each "child" is a raw kiw-width placeholder index, NOT a tagged Node. The parent operator implies all children are keys, so per-child tags are elided. Decoder MUST treat the body as exactly n raw kiw-bit fields and reject any tag byte in this region with <code>Error::OperatorContextViolation { tag, context: MultiBody }</code>.
* '''Thresh''' — the body is <code>Tag(6) | (k−1)(5) | (n−1)(5) | n × Node</code>. Each child is a full recursive Node (children can be arbitrary operators including key references, hashes, timelocks, nested logical ops).

Both families encode <code>k</code> as <code>k−1</code> in a fixed 5-bit field; both encode <code>n</code> as <code>n−1</code> in a fixed 5-bit field. The fixed-5 width is bit-efficient for the realistic range <code>1 ≤ k ≤ n ≤ 32</code> per BIP 388.

=====Key references=====

Operators that emit a key (<code>wpkh</code>, <code>pkh</code>, <code>pk_k</code>, <code>pk_h</code>, <code>tr</code>) carry the placeholder reference inline in their body bits as a <code>key_index</code> field of width <code>kiw = ⌈log₂(n)⌉</code> bits, where <code>n</code> is the descriptor's key count. <code>key_index</code> values <code>0..n−1</code> reference the corresponding <code>@i</code> placeholder in the BIP 388 key information vector; values <code>≥ n</code> are rejected with <code>Error::PlaceholderIndexOutOfRange { idx, n }</code>. The reference-implementation formula is:

  <code>kiw = 32 − (n − 1).leading_zeros()</code>     // = ⌈log₂(n)⌉ for n ≥ 2, clamped to 0 at n ∈ {0, 1}

Representative widths:

{| class="wikitable"
! n !! 1 !! 2 !! 3 !! 4 !! 5–8 !! 9–16 !! 17–32
|-
! kiw
| 0 || 1 || 2 || 2 || 3 || 4 || 5
|}

At <code>n = 1</code>, kiw = 0 and the <code>key_index</code> field is zero bits wide (no wire representation). For <code>tr()</code> only, the NUMS H-point is signalled by the 1-bit <code>is_nums</code> flag preceding <code>key_index</code> (§"<code>tr()</code> NUMS encoding"); <code>is_nums = 1</code> suppresses the kiw field entirely on the wire.

For variable-arity multi-family operators (<code>multi</code>, <code>sortedmulti</code>, <code>multi_a</code>, <code>sortedmulti_a</code>), each child key slot is a <code>key_index</code> field of the same <code>kiw</code> bit width, packed contiguously after the threshold and count fields per §"Operator children layout".

Inline keys (raw xpubs, raw pubkeys) are NOT permitted in v0; every key position references a BIP 388 placeholder. This guarantees the Template Card encodes the wallet structure without carrying any key material.

====TLV section====

Following the operator tree is the TLV (tag-length-value) section, which carries optional metadata: per-<code>@N</code> use-site path overrides, master-key fingerprints, xpubs, and per-<code>@N</code> origin-path overrides. The TLV section runs from the end of the tree until the codex32 symbol-aligned bit stream is exhausted; it may be empty.

Each TLV entry is:

  <code>[tag: 5 bits] [length: LP4-ext varint, in BITS] [payload: length bits]</code>

The ''length'' field gives the payload size in '''bits''' (not bytes). Entries appear in strictly ascending tag-value order; duplicates and out-of-order entries are rejected. Unknown tags (those not allocated below) are '''preserved verbatim''': a decoder MUST buffer each unknown entry's payload bits unchanged and re-emit it on re-encode, in ascending tag-value order interleaved with the known entries. A decoder MUST NOT drop an unknown entry — dropping one changes the re-encoded bytecode and breaks the chunk-set-identifier check for any chunked card that carries a reserved-tag TLV (§"Chunking"). (This is a stricter contract than plain length-prefix skipping, which would silently discard the entry.)

=====TLV tag allocations=====

{| class="wikitable"
! Tag !! Entry !! Payload shape
|-
| <code>0x00</code> || <code>UseSitePathOverrides</code> || Sparse <code>(idx: kiw bits, use-site-path: per §"Use-site path declaration")</code> list. Overrides the shared use-site default for the listed <code>@N</code>.
|-
| <code>0x01</code> || <code>Fingerprints</code> || Sparse <code>(idx: kiw bits, fingerprint: 32 bits)</code> list. Master-key fingerprint for the listed <code>@N</code>, in BIP 32 byte order.
|-
| <code>0x02</code> || <code>Pubkeys</code> || Sparse <code>(idx: kiw bits, xpub: 520 bits)</code> list. xpub bytes are chain-code (32 bytes) followed by compressed pubkey (33 bytes). A non-empty <code>Pubkeys</code> entry promotes the descriptor to BIP 388 wallet-policy mode (xpubs are carried on the wire, not derived from origin paths).
|-
| <code>0x03</code> || <code>OriginPathOverrides</code> || Sparse <code>(idx: kiw bits, origin-path-encoding: per §"origin-path-encoding")</code> list. Overrides the canonical origin path for the listed <code>@N</code> when the wrapper origin is non-canonical or undefined.
|-
| <code>0x04</code>–<code>0x1F</code> || ''reserved'' || Reserved for future TLV allocations. Decoders MUST preserve unknown tags verbatim (buffer the payload via the length-prefix and re-emit in ascending tag order); they MUST NOT drop them.
|}

''kiw'' (key-index width) is <code>⌈log₂(n)⌉</code> per §"Key references", identical to the tree's <code>key_index</code> field width. Sparse-TLV invariants (uniform across all four sparse TLVs):

* Each <code>idx < n</code>; out-of-range rejected with <code>Error::PlaceholderIndexOutOfRange</code>.
* Indices appear in strictly ascending order; non-ascending rejected with <code>Error::OverrideOrderViolation</code>.
* Each TLV is non-empty; encoders MUST omit a TLV entry when it carries no content (no <code>(idx, value)</code> pairs).

=====Fingerprints — privacy=====

The <code>Fingerprints</code> TLV (tag <code>0x01</code>) leaks which seeds match which <code>@N</code> placeholders. It is optional metadata; implementations SHOULD NOT emit it by default. Recovery tools MUST warn the user before including fingerprints, especially for solo-user single-seed wallets where the disclosure is unnecessary. Decoders that surface parsed fingerprints to the user MUST flag the data as privacy-sensitive.

When fingerprints are absent (the default), recovery tools match seeds to placeholders by trial derivation and xpub comparison, which is computationally trivial for typical wallets.

=====End-of-section detection (rollback-as-padding)=====

The TLV section has no explicit terminator: it runs until the codex32 symbol-aligned bit stream is exhausted. Because the wire is packed into 5-bit codex32 symbols, the final symbol can introduce up to 4 bits of trailing zero-padding (and the byte boundary up to 7 bits) that are not part of any TLV entry. Decoders therefore need a precise contract for distinguishing "end of section reached" from "malformed TLV entry."

Decoders SHOULD use a save/restore-position mechanism on the bit-reader so that partial reads do not consume bits prematurely. The contract is:

# Before parsing each candidate TLV entry, save the bit-reader position.
# Attempt to read <code>[tag: 5 bits] [length: LP4-ext varint] [payload: length bits]</code> plus any per-tag inner-record validation.
# On any parse failure, restore the bit-reader to the saved position and inspect the bits remaining at that position.
# '''If <code>remaining_bits ≤ 7</code>''', inspect those bits: if '''all are zero''' they are the codex32 symbol-alignment padding and the decoder treats the failure as a clean end-of-section marker and stops; if '''any is non-zero''' the decoder MUST reject the card per §"Payload" (<code>Error::&lt;PAD_ERROR_VARIANT_TBD_P2&gt;</code>).
# '''If <code>remaining_bits > 7</code>''', the failure represents a genuinely malformed input and the original parse error is propagated.

The 7-bit padding tolerance accommodates the symbol-aligned wire's worst-case trailing slack. Encoders MUST omit empty TLVs; decoders therefore treat any zero-length TLV at end-of-stream as padding via the rollback path rather than as a valid empty entry.

=====Bit-layout example=====

The bytecode for the policy <code>wsh(multi(2, @0/<0;1>/*, @1/<0;1>/*))</code> with the BIP 48 mainnet multisig P2WSH shared origin path <code>m/48'/0'/0'/2'</code> and no fingerprints is the 82-bit stream <code>2052d84212a00182182140</code> (11 bytes; 82 bits used, 6 bits trailing zero-padding from the last byte). Reproducible via the reference CLI: <code>md encode --path "m/48'/0'/0'/2'" 'wsh(multi(2,@0/<0;1>/*,@1/<0;1>/*))'</code> followed by <code>md bytecode &lt;phrase&gt;</code>. Section breakdown (n = 2, kiw = ⌈log₂(2)⌉ = 1):

{| class="wikitable"
! Bits !! Section !! Decoded
|-
| 5 || Header || <code>00100</code> — paths flag <code>0</code>, version <code>0b0100</code> = 4
|-
| 5 || Path-decl: <code>n−1</code> || <code>00001</code> — <code>n = 2</code> placeholders
|-
| 4 || Path-decl: depth || <code>0100</code> — 4 components
|-
| 11 || Path-decl: comp[0] = <code>48'</code> || <code>1 0110 110000</code> — hardened, LP4(L=6), value 48 = <code>0b110000</code>
|-
| 5 || Path-decl: comp[1] = <code>0'</code> || <code>1 0000</code> — hardened, LP4(L=0), value 0
|-
| 5 || Path-decl: comp[2] = <code>0'</code> || <code>1 0000</code> — hardened, LP4(L=0), value 0
|-
| 7 || Path-decl: comp[3] = <code>2'</code> || <code>1 0010 10</code> — hardened, LP4(L=2), value 2
|-
| 16 || Use-site path: <code>/<0;1>/*</code> || <code>1 000 (0 0000) (0 0001 1) 0</code> — multipath present, count−2=0 (count=2), alt 0 = unhardened 0, alt 1 = unhardened 1, unhardened wildcard
|-
| 6 || Tree: <code>wsh</code> tag || <code>000010</code> — primary tag <code>0x02</code>
|-
| 6 || Tree: <code>multi</code> tag || <code>000110</code> — primary tag <code>0x06</code>
|-
| 5 || Tree: <code>k − 1</code> || <code>00001</code> — threshold k = 2
|-
| 5 || Tree: <code>n − 1</code> || <code>00001</code> — child count n = 2
|-
| 1 || Tree: idx[0] || <code>0</code> — placeholder <code>@0</code> (kiw = 1)
|-
| 1 || Tree: idx[1] || <code>1</code> — placeholder <code>@1</code>
|-
| 0 || TLV section || empty (no fingerprints, no overrides)
|}

Section sums: 5 (header) + 37 (path-decl: 5+4+11+5+5+7) + 16 (use-site) + 24 (tree: <code>wsh</code>(6) + <code>multi</code>(6) + <code>k−1</code>(5) + <code>n−1</code>(5) + 2 × idx(1)) + 0 (TLV) = 82 bits. Note the multi-family body packs raw kiw-bit indices directly (no per-child tags) per §"Operator children layout"; this is the key v0.30 multi-family packing change relative to v0.x's per-child <code>pk_k</code> framing.

The same policy with a <code>Fingerprints</code> TLV entry binding <code>@0</code> to <code>0xdeadbeef</code> and <code>@1</code> to <code>0xcafebabe</code> is the 164-bit stream <code>2052d84212a00182182142f09bd5b7ddfcafebabe0</code> (21 bytes; 164 bits used, 4 bits trailing zero-padding). The first 82 bits are identical to the no-fingerprints encoding above; the trailing 82 bits are the <code>Fingerprints</code> TLV entry:

{| class="wikitable"
! Bits !! Field !! Decoded
|-
| 5 || TLV tag || <code>00001</code> — tag <code>0x01</code> (<code>Fingerprints</code>)
|-
| 11 || TLV length || LP4 varint encoding 66 (= 2 entries × (kiw + 32) = 2 × 33 bits); <code>0111 1000010</code> (L=7, payload <code>1000010</code>)
|-
| 1 || Entry 0 idx || <code>0</code> — placeholder <code>@0</code> (kiw = 1)
|-
| 32 || Entry 0 fingerprint || <code>deadbeef</code>
|-
| 1 || Entry 1 idx || <code>1</code> — placeholder <code>@1</code>
|-
| 32 || Entry 1 fingerprint || <code>cafebabe</code>
|}

====LP4-ext varint====

LP4-ext is the variable-length integer encoding used for path-component values, use-site-path alternative values, and TLV-length fields. Bit-aligned, MSB-first within each field.

  <code>single-form (L < 15):    [L: 4 bits] [payload: L bits]</code>
  <code>extension-form (L = 15): [L: 4 bits = 15] [L_high: 4 bits]</code>
  <code>                         [payload_low: 14 bits] [payload_high: L_high bits]</code>
  <code>                         total = (payload_high << 14) | payload_low</code>

In single-form, ''L'' bits of payload follow the 4-bit length prefix MSB-first. In extension-form (signaled by <code>L = 15</code>), an additional 4-bit ''L_high'' selects 1..15 extra payload bits beyond the 14-bit ''payload_low''; the full value is reassembled as <code>(payload_high << 14) | payload_low</code>. Total payload capacity is up to <code>14 + 15 = 29</code> bits, encoding values <code>0..2^29 − 1</code>. Out-of-range values are rejected with <code>Error::VarintOverflow { value }</code>.

'''Canonicality.''' Encoders MUST use the minimal-length encoding for every value: the smallest <code>L</code> that fits it (single-form for values needing ≤ 14 payload bits), and extension-form only when the value needs more than 14 payload bits (with <code>L_high ≥ 1</code>). Decoders are '''lenient''': they accept a non-minimal encoding (an over-long <code>L</code>, or extension-form with <code>L_high = 0</code>) with no decode-side minimality check. Enforcing minimality on decode would flip a previously-decodable single-string wire to a reject, violating the recovery-safety invariant. A non-minimal encoding is nonetheless never silently ratified for a '''chunked''' card: reassembly re-encodes the decoded policy minimally, so a non-minimal wire produces a derived chunk-set identifier that differs from the wire value and is rejected with <code>Error::ChunkSetIdMismatch</code> (§"Chunking").

Bit costs for representative values: <code>0</code> is 4 bits (L=0, no payload); <code>1</code> is 5 bits (L=1, 1-bit payload); <code>84</code> is 11 bits (L=7, 7-bit payload); <code>16383</code> is 18 bits (L=14, 14-bit payload, single-form boundary); <code>16384</code> is 23 bits (extension-form, L_high=1).

Note: LP4-ext applies to variable-range fields only — path-component values, use-site-path alternative values, and TLV length values. The <code>multi</code>, <code>sortedmulti</code>, <code>multi_a</code>, <code>sortedmulti_a</code>, and <code>thresh</code> threshold (<code>k − 1</code>) and count (<code>n − 1</code>) fields use '''fixed 5-bit''' encoding, NOT LP4-ext: bounded by the BIP 388 wallet-policy cap of ≤ 32 keys, fixed-5 is bit-efficient for every realistic value 1..31 (saves 11 bits across the 17-wallet validation corpus relative to LP4-ext throughout). Timelock values (<code>after</code>, <code>older</code>) are encoded as raw 32-bit fields per BIP 68 / BIP 113.

====Taproot tree====

The <code>tr()</code> operator (<code>0x01</code>) encodes a top-level taproot wallet policy. The internal-key sub-tree (a key reference) immediately follows the <code>tr()</code> tag. The optional script-tree position that follows is one of:

* Absent — keypath-only <code>tr(KEY)</code>; no further bytes in the operator payload.
* A single tap-leaf miniscript — encoded directly as a leaf-script tag sequence (any operator from the per-leaf miniscript subset detailed below in this section). This is the <code>tr(KEY, leaf)</code> form.
* A <code>TapTree</code> inner-node framing — a recursive <code>[TapTree=0x05][LEFT_SUBTREE][RIGHT_SUBTREE]</code> sequence where each <code>SUBTREE</code> is recursively defined as another tap-leaf or another inner-node framing. This is the <code>tr(KEY, TREE)</code> multi-leaf form. (Historical tag-value drift: <code>TapTree</code> was 0x08 in v0.5, renumbered to 0x07 in v0.6, renumbered to 0x05 in v0.11; the v0.30 6-bit primary tag space keeps 0x05.)

Multi-leaf taproot trees are encoded recursively using the <code>TapTree (0x05)</code> tag as inner-node framing. BIP 388's curly-brace source form <code>{LEFT, RIGHT}</code> is the human-readable counterpart of this bytecode; the MD bytecode is the wire encoding of that grammar.

The decoder enforces BIP 341's <code>TAPROOT_CONTROL_MAX_NODE_COUNT = 128</code> ceiling on tree depth via a peek-before-recurse pattern: a <code>0x05</code> tag is consumed only after the depth gate passes, so a hostile producer cannot blow the parser's stack via deeply nested framings. Decoders MUST reject trees that would exceed depth 128 with <code>Error::DecodeRecursionDepthExceeded { depth, max: 128 }</code>.

Implementations MAY enforce a per-leaf miniscript subset matching their target hardware signer's documented admit list. The MD encoding format itself does not require this — see §"Signer compatibility (informational)" below for the layered-responsibility framing. Implementations SHOULD clearly document any such limitations per BIP 388 §"Implementation guidelines".

=====Signer compatibility (informational)=====

The MD encoding format is neutral on hardware-signer compatibility. An MD-encoded backup of a BIP 388 wallet policy is structurally well-formed if and only if the policy parses under BIP 388 + BIP 379; whether the policy is signable on a particular hardware signer is a separate concern handled by tools above and below MD.

The responsibility chain is:

# Wallet software (e.g., Sparrow, Liana, Specter, Bitcoin Core) constructs a BIP 388 wallet policy. The wallet should know which signer the policy targets and produce shapes the signer admits.
# MD encodes the policy losslessly into engravable steel-backup form.
# The user, recovering the backup, decodes the MD string back into a BIP 388 policy.
# The recovery wallet pairs the policy with the matching signer and constructs spending transactions.

If an MD-encoded backup contains operators a recovery-time signer will not sign, recovery may require either a different signer or manual signing infrastructure (Bitcoin Core, custom signing pipelines).

Implementations MAY provide opt-in signer-subset validators as a layered concern. Such validators are tracked separately from this specification — see for example the named subsets maintained for Coldcard (firmware/edge <code>docs/taproot.md</code>) and Ledger (<code>LedgerHQ/vanadium</code> <code>apps/bitcoin/common/src/bip388/cleartext.rs</code>). The reference implementation does not currently ship such a validator; were one added it would sit above <code>md-codec</code> as a separate layered checker, not as part of the wire format.

=====Bit-layout examples=====

The four representative taproot shapes below are sourced from the reference implementation (verifiable via <code>md encode</code> + <code>md bytecode</code>). For each shape, the table walks the tree portion of the bit stream; the header, origin-path-decl, and use-site-path-decl bit-counts are summarized but not redrawn (they share the same shape as the §"Bit-layout example" walkthrough above, parameterized only by ''n'' and the chosen origin path).

'''Key-path-only <code>tr(@0/<0;1>/*)</code>''' with origin path <code>m/86'/0'/0'</code>, ''n'' = 1, key-index width <code>kiw</code> = 0.
* Phrase: <code>md1yq80tgggqpsyn7sts50y35ujk</code>
* Bytecode: <code>200ef5a108006040</code> (8 bytes; 60 bits used)
* Header (5) + path-decl (31) + use-site (16) + tree (8) = 60 bits
* Tree (8 bits): <code>000001 0 0</code> — <code>tr</code> tag <code>0x01</code> (6 bits); <code>is_nums</code> = 0 (1 bit); <code>key_index</code> = (suppressed, kiw = 0); <code>has_tree</code> = 0 (no script tree)

'''Single-leaf <code>tr(@0/<0;1>/*, pk(@1/<0;1>/*))</code>''' with origin path <code>m/48'/0'/0'/2'</code>, ''n'' = 2, ''kiw'' = 1.
* Phrase: <code>md1ypfdsssj5qqczf2s3zwfsvk6dgpe</code>
* Bytecode: <code>2052d84212a001812540</code> (10 bytes; 74 bits used)
* Header (5) + path-decl (37) + use-site (16) + tree (16) = 74 bits
* Tree (16 bits): <code>000001 0 0 1 [001010 1]</code> — <code>tr</code> tag (6); <code>is_nums</code> = 0 (1); <code>key_index</code> = 0 (kiw = 1); <code>has_tree</code> = 1 (1); leaf <code>pk_k(@1)</code> as a bare <code>PkK</code> node (6-bit tag <code>0x0A</code> + 1-bit <code>key_index</code> = 1). Tap-leaves do NOT carry the <code>c:</code> wrapper around <code>pk_k</code> that wsh-context BIP 388 sugar emits — the BIP 388 <code>pk(K)</code> sugar expansion is context-aware, and tap-leaves emit <code>PkK</code> directly per §"Round-trip canonical form".

'''Single-leaf <code>tr(@0/<0;1>/*, multi_a(2, @1/<0;1>/*, @2/<0;1>/*, @3/<0;1>/*))</code>''' with origin path <code>m/48'/0'/0'/2'</code>, ''n'' = 4, ''kiw'' = 2.
* Phrase: <code>md1yrfdsssj5qqczyszymq8hhdwdr8038m</code>
* Bytecode: <code>20d2d84212a00181120226c0</code> (12 bytes; 90 bits used)
* Header (5) + path-decl (37) + use-site (16) + tree (32) = 90 bits
* Tree (32 bits): <code>000001 0 00 1 [001000 00001 00010 01 10 11]</code> — <code>tr</code> tag (6); <code>is_nums</code> = 0 (1); <code>key_index</code> = 0 (kiw = 2); <code>has_tree</code> = 1 (1); leaf <code>multi_a</code> (6-bit tag <code>0x08</code>) with <code>k − 1</code> = 1 (5 bits), <code>n − 1</code> = 2 (5 bits), then three raw kiw-bit indices = 1, 2, 3 (multi-family raw-index packing per §"Operator children layout"; no per-child tags).

'''Two-leaf TapTree <code>tr(@0/<0;1>/*, {pk(@1/<0;1>/*), pk(@2/<0;1>/*)})</code>''' with origin path <code>m/48'/0'/0'/2'</code>, ''n'' = 3, ''kiw'' = 2.
* Phrase: <code>md1yzfdsssj5qqczy22f2ad62s0r5ju6z9</code>
* Bytecode: <code>2092d84212a00181114a4a80</code> (12 bytes; 90 bits used)
* Header (5) + path-decl (37) + use-site (16) + tree (32) = 90 bits
* Tree (32 bits): <code>000001 0 00 1 [000101 [001010 01] [001010 10]]</code> — <code>tr</code> tag (6); <code>is_nums</code> = 0 (1); <code>key_index</code> = 0 (kiw = 2); <code>has_tree</code> = 1 (1); then <code>TapTree</code> inner node (6-bit tag <code>0x05</code>) with two child sub-trees: left = <code>pk_k(@1)</code> (6 + 2 = 8 bits), right = <code>pk_k(@2)</code> (6 + 2 = 8 bits). Deeper TapTree nesting recursively chains additional <code>0x05</code> framings up to the BIP 341 depth-128 ceiling (also enforced by the decoder via <code>MAX_DECODE_DEPTH = 128</code>).

For the BIP-341 NUMS H-point key-path-only form (<code>tr(NUMS, ...)</code>), the body's leading <code>is_nums</code> bit is set and the <code>key_index</code> field is suppressed entirely on the wire. The descriptor's tree omits any internal-key placeholder. See §"<code>tr()</code> NUMS encoding" above for the canonicalization invariant; concrete worked NUMS examples can be regenerated via <code>md compile --context tap '...'</code> in the reference implementation when built with the <code>cli-compiler</code> feature.

====Round-trip canonical form====

An MD-encoded Template Card MUST round-trip losslessly with the BIP 388 wallet policy string in canonical form. Canonical form requires:

* No optional whitespace anywhere in the policy string.
* Multipath shorthand <code>/**</code> is expanded to <code>/&lt;0;1&gt;/*</code> in canonical form.
* The key information vector is ordered by ascending placeholder index, with <code>@0</code> first.
* Hardened path components use the <code>'</code> character (not <code>h</code> or <code>H</code>).

Encoders MUST produce canonical form. Decoders MUST accept canonical form and SHOULD accept the equivalent non-canonical forms above (normalizing on decode). Decoders MAY reject other non-canonical inputs (e.g., re-ordered key vectors that don't match placeholder indices).

'''Walker normalization invariant.''' At every key-check position the canonical wire shape is a bare <code>Tag::PkK</code> (or <code>Tag::PkH</code>) — <code>Tag::Check</code> is NEVER emitted wrapping a key leaf. The renderer reconstructs the <code>c:</code> wrapper at output time for canonical BIP 388 rendering of <code>c:pk_k(K)</code> / <code>c:pk_h(K)</code> (or the BIP 379 sugar <code>pk(K)</code> / <code>pkh(K)</code>). <code>Tag::Check</code> remains valid on the wire only when wrapping a non-key child. This eliminates per-c:-position duplication, saving ~5 bits per key-check site.

===Chunking===

When a Template Card's canonical bytecode exceeds the single-string regular-code cap (80 data symbols = 400 payload bits, §"Length envelope"), the encoding MUST be chunked. Encoders MAY also chunk a smaller bytecode for ergonomic reasons (e.g., to fit on physical media) but SHOULD prefer single-string encoding when the payload fits; the reference <code>md encode</code> CLI requires an explicit <code>--force-chunked</code> flag to chunk a payload that would fit in a single string.

'''Chunk-count sizing and fragment split (normative — deterministic).''' The chunk count is fixed by a per-chunk budget of 320 payload bits (64 data symbols): <code>count = ⌈padded_payload_bits / 320⌉</code>, where <code>padded_payload_bits</code> is the assembled payload zero-padded to a whole byte. If <code>count > 64</code> the encoder MUST reject the payload (too large to chunk). This 320-bit budget is deliberately below the 360-bit theoretical per-chunk maximum (§"Length envelope") so the 37-bit chunk header always fits alongside the fragment inside one regular-code codeword. The assembled payload (byte length <code>plen</code>) is then split into exactly <code>count</code> whole-byte fragments with <code>bytes_per_chunk = ⌈plen / count⌉</code>: fragment <code>i</code> is the byte slice <code>[i · bytes_per_chunk, min((i+1) · bytes_per_chunk, plen))</code> — the leading fragments each carry <code>bytes_per_chunk</code> bytes and the final fragment carries the (possibly shorter) remainder. Because both the count and the split are fully determined by the assembled payload, any two conforming encoders emit '''identical''' chunk strings for the same policy.

====Chunk header (37 bits)====

Each chunk is a complete codex32-derived string. In place of the 5-bit payload header used by single-string Template Cards (§"Bytecode header"), each chunk's bit stream begins with a 37-bit chunk header. The first 5-bit symbol carries the auto-dispatch discriminator at bit 0 (<code>chunked = 1</code>); see §"Auto-dispatch and safe rejection".

{| class="wikitable"
! Bits !! Field !! Notes
|-
| 36–33 || Version || 4-bit version. v0.30 = <code>0b0100</code> (= 4). Usable WF-redesign set is <code>{4, 8, 12}</code> per §"Auto-dispatch and safe rejection".
|-
| 32 || Chunked flag || MUST be <code>1</code> in chunk headers. This is bit 0 of the first 5-bit codex32 symbol; auto-dispatch reads it before any other field. The single-payload header carries <code>chunked = 0</code> at the same bit position (which is the low bit <code>v0</code> of its version field).
|-
| 31–12 || Chunk-set identifier (CSI) || 20 bits. Derived from the assembled payload's <code>Md1EncodingId</code> (top 20 bits of <code>SHA-256</code> over the canonical bit-packed payload, MSB-first). Identical across all chunks in a set; functions as the cross-chunk integrity anchor.
|-
| 11–6 || Count − 1 || Total chunks in the set, range <code>1..64</code>, encoded as <code>count − 1</code> in 6 bits. Out-of-range rejected with <code>Error::ChunkCountOutOfRange</code>.
|-
| 5–0 || Index || This chunk's zero-based index within the set, in 6 bits. MUST be less than ''count''; out-of-range rejected with <code>Error::ChunkIndexOutOfRange</code>.
|}

====Chunk fragment====

After the 37-bit chunk header, each chunk carries a '''whole-byte fragment''' of the assembled payload. The assembled payload — the same canonical bit-packed bytecode a single string would carry, zero-padded to a whole-byte boundary — is split into <code>count</code> near-equal whole-byte slices, one per chunk; slice ''i'' is written as its bytes (8 bits each) immediately after chunk ''i'''s 37-bit header. The header/fragment boundary is exactly bit 37, '''contiguous''' (no slack): the first fragment byte's high bits share the eighth 5-bit symbol with the last header bits. The division is therefore fixed deterministically by the near-equal whole-byte split — there is no encoder-chosen bit-boundary freedom — and a decoder recovers each slice as <code>⌊(symbol-aligned-bit-count − 37) / 8⌋</code> whole bytes (the ≤4 trailing symbol-padding bits per chunk are discarded).

'''Note — do not cross-import mk1's framing.''' The sibling Mnemonic Key (MK / <code>mk1</code>) format chunks with a '''fixed 53-byte''' fragment per chunk (one xpub-sized record); md1 does '''not'''. An md1 chunk carries a variable, near-equal whole-byte slice sized from the payload and the 320-bit budget above. Implementers MUST NOT apply mk1's fixed-53-byte framing to md1 chunks.

The chunk-set identifier serves the cross-chunk integrity role that a separate appended hash served in earlier wire formats. Because the CSI is derived from the assembled-payload SHA-256, an encoder that draws a non-conforming CSI produces a string whose CSI cannot be reproduced by a conforming decoder; mismatch is detected at reassembly (see below). v0.30 does NOT carry a separate cross-chunk hash field.

====Reassembly====

Decoders reassemble a chunked Template Card by:

# Collecting all chunks transcribed by the user.
# Verifying all chunks share the same 20-bit chunk-set identifier; reject if mixed.
# Verifying all chunks declare the same total chunk count; reject if inconsistent.
# Sorting chunks by chunk index; reject if any index appears multiple times or is missing.
# Verifying the highest index equals (count − 1); reject if not.
# Concatenating each chunk's fragment '''bytes''' in index order to reconstruct the byte-padded canonical payload.
# Decoding the assembled payload as a Template Card (5-bit header at bit offset 0, then the standard five-section layout).
# Computing <code>Md1EncodingId</code> from the canonical bit-packed re-encoding of the decoded Template Card and verifying that the chunk-headers' wire chunk-set identifier matches the value derived from <code>Md1EncodingId</code> per §"Chunk header"; reject on mismatch with an error specifically identifying the derivation check (the reference implementation surfaces this as <code>Error::ChunkSetIdMismatch</code>). This ratifies that the encoder followed the deterministic-CSI contract; a non-conforming encoder that drew a random value would produce a string unreadable by conforming decoders.

===Policy identifier===

The engraved policy anchor is the '''<code>WalletPolicyId</code>''' — a 16-byte identifier that MAY be rendered as a 12-word BIP 39 phrase and stamped on a separate medium for offline cross-verification of a digital backup against the engraved Template Card. It is a canonical-expanded hash of the wallet ''policy'' — the template tree plus the per-<code>@N</code> origin / use-site / fingerprint / xpub records — so that two engravings of the same logical wallet produce the same anchor whether they elide canonical paths or write them out explicitly.

'''Preimage (byte-exact; reference: <code>crates/md-codec/src/identity.rs</code>).''' The <code>WalletPolicyId</code> is <code>SHA-256(preimage)[0..16]</code>, where <code>preimage = canonical_template_tree_bytes || concat(records)</code> is built as:

# '''Canonicalize''' placeholder indices (ascending first-occurrence renumbering) so the anchor is invariant to placeholder permutation.
# '''<code>canonical_template_tree_bytes</code>''' — write the placeholder-form tree (§"Tree operators") into a fresh bit stream and finalize (zero-pad to a whole byte). These are the tree bits ONLY — no header, no path declaration, no TLVs.
# Expand to per-<code>@N</code> records in ascending index order. For each record, resolve then serialize:
#* '''Resolve the origin path''': an explicit path verbatim, or — for an elided (depth-0) origin on a canonical wrapper — the canonical-origin table value (§"Elided origins and canonical-default paths"). This resolution is what makes the anchor stable across origin-elision.
#* '''Record bytes''': into a fresh bit stream write <code>varint(origin_path_bit_len)</code> (LP4-ext varint, length in '''bits'''), then the origin-path bits MSB-first, then <code>varint(use_site_bit_len)</code>, then the use-site-path bits; finalize (single whole-byte pad).
#* '''<code>presence_byte</code>''' <code>= (fp_present | (xpub_present << 1)) & 0b0000_0011</code> — bit 0 set iff a fingerprint is present for this <code>@N</code>, bit 1 set iff an xpub is present; bits 2–7 are reserved and MUST be 0.
#* Append <code>presence_byte || record_bytes || fingerprint? || xpub?</code>, where <code>fingerprint</code> is 4 bytes and <code>xpub</code> is the 65-byte wire form (32-byte chain code || 33-byte compressed pubkey) when present.

The anchor is therefore stable across origin- and use-site-path elision, and '''presence-significant''' on the fingerprint and xpub axes: two cards carrying the same template + paths but a different set of concrete xpubs (or fingerprints) produce different anchors, and a template-only card differs from the same wallet with concrete cosigner xpubs.

A <code>WalletPolicyId</code> is OPTIONAL and never required for recovery from the Template Card alone; it serves only as a cryptographic anchor for verifying that a supplemental digital copy of the policy is authentic.

'''Engraving — MAY, not SHOULD.''' The 12-word <code>WalletPolicyId</code> phrase (<code>WalletPolicyId::to_phrase()</code>) encodes the 16-byte (128-bit) identifier as 12 BIP 39 words — 132 bits total: the 128 identifier bits plus a 4-bit checksum. It MAY be engraved on a separate metal anchor for offline cross-verification with a digital backup. Users who maintain only the codex32 Template Card need not engrave the phrase — the codex32 string carries the policy directly with BCH error correction; the phrase is a redundant integrity check, not a recovery primitive. For a minimal-cost identifier, the top 4 bytes of the <code>WalletPolicyId</code>, rendered as 8 lowercase hex characters (parallel to a BIP 32 master-key fingerprint), are offered as a short display form; the reference CLI exposes it via <code>md encode --policy-id-fingerprint</code> and <code>md inspect</code>. (<code>WalletPolicyId</code> has no dedicated <code>fingerprint()</code> method; the short form is the first 4 bytes of its <code>as_bytes()</code>.)

The <code>WalletPolicyId</code> is a distinct value from <code>Md1EncodingId</code> (§"Header"), which hashes the '''raw bit-packed payload bytecode''' and is the chunk-set-identifier source. The reference implementation also defines a <code>WalletDescriptorTemplateId</code> (template content only — use-site-path-decl bits, tree bits, and use-site-override TLV bits — excluding the origin paths and fingerprints); it is not engraved and is out of scope for this section.

====Template-level vs instance-level identity====

The single <code>WalletPolicyId</code> anchor spans both levels of specificity because its preimage is '''presence-significant''' on the xpub axis (see the construction above):

* '''Template-level''' — a Template Card carrying no concrete xpubs (no <code>Pubkeys</code> TLV). Its <code>WalletPolicyId</code> identifies the wallet ''template + path layout'': the BIP 388 script structure plus the per-<code>@N</code> origin paths. Two wallets with the same template and path layout but different concrete cosigner xpubs share this template-level anchor.
* '''Instance-level''' — a card that also carries concrete xpubs. The 65-byte xpub bytes fold into the preimage, so the <code>WalletPolicyId</code> now distinguishes wallet ''instances'': two wallets are distinct even if they share a template and path layout, as long as their cosigner xpub sets differ.

There is '''no''' separate on-card "Wallet Instance ID" value and no separate hash domain: the per-instance identity is the same <code>WalletPolicyId</code>, computed over a preimage that includes the xpubs when they are present. The wire carries only the 65-byte (chain-code || compressed-pubkey) xpub entries of TLV <code>0x02</code>; the full 78-byte BIP 32 extended-key serialization is '''not''' reconstructible from card data (the parent fingerprint and depth are not on the wire), so any identity computation MUST use the 65-byte wire form, as the preimage above does.

'''Path-divergence injectivity.''' Two policies with the same script template but different per-cosigner origin paths (e.g. one cosigner on BIP 48 account 0' vs account 1') hash to different <code>WalletPolicyId</code>s, because the per-<code>@N</code> origin bits are part of the preimage — they are different wallet shapes. (Historical note: MD versions ≤ 0.9 lossily flattened divergent per-<code>@N</code> paths to a single shared path and so collided such wallets; the per-<code>@N</code> origin encoding of v0.10+ closed that. See §"Backwards Compatibility".)

===Decoder requirements===

Conformant MD decoders MUST:

# Recognize the MD HRP and reject any other HRP.
# Reject mixed-case strings.
# Auto-dispatch single-payload vs chunked by reading bit 0 of the first 5-bit symbol (§"Auto-dispatch and safe rejection"); reject WF-version mismatch cleanly.
# Reject reserved-range tag values and structurally-invalid operator-context positions per the error taxonomy below.
# Implement BCH substitution-error correction for the regular code per the polynomials specified above (up to 4 character substitutions).
# Verify the chunk-set identifier on reassembled chunks (compute <code>Md1EncodingId</code> from the assembled payload and reject if its top 20 bits differ from the chunk headers' wire <code>chunk_set_id</code>).
# Validate the bytecode against the tag table (reject reserved-range operator tags; preserve unknown TLV tags verbatim per §"TLV section") and enforce the decoder canonical-form validators (§"Decoder canonical-form validators").
# Reject non-zero trailing padding (§"Payload").
# Round-trip with BIP 388 canonical form.

Decoders SHOULD:

# Implement erasure-aware decoding when the user supplies known-bad positions ('''future work''' — the reference decoder performs substitution correction only; FOLLOWUP <code>impl-bch-erasure-decoding-md-mk</code>).
# Implement structure-aware candidate filtering during recovery (see §"Guided recovery"; '''future work''' — FOLLOWUP <code>impl-guided-recovery-md-mk</code>).
# Provide informational reporting on every decode attempt (§"Decoder reporting").
# Display the bech32 alphabet and example characters during user transcription.

====Error taxonomy====

Conformant decoders MUST distinguish the following structurally-defined error categories. The reference implementation surfaces each as a distinct <code>Error</code> variant in <code>crates/md-codec/src/error.rs</code>; cross-implementations MUST surface semantically equivalent categories so conformance test suites can pin error paths.

{| class="wikitable"
! Error !! Trigger
|-
| <code>WireVersionMismatch { got: u8 }</code> || Single-payload or chunked version field ≠ accepted v0.30 value (4 in this release). Per the auto-dispatch trace, v0.x payloads surface here cleanly.
|-
| <code>MalformedHeader { detail }</code> || Chunked-flag inconsistent with caller context; chunk-header fields out of range; chunk-header version mismatched with payload version.
|-
| <code>TagOutOfRange { primary: u8 }</code> || 6-bit primary in reserved range <code>0x24</code>–<code>0x3E</code>; primary <code>0x3F</code> extension prefix with any subcode (no extension subcodes allocated in v0.30).
|-
| <code>Codex32DecodeError(String)</code> || BCH verify returns false (HRP mismatch, uncorrectable transcription error, wrong format) or any other codex32-layer failure surfaced by the underlying decoder.
|-
| <code>OperatorContextViolation { tag, context: ContextKind }</code> || Tag in a forbidden position. <code>ContextKind</code> enum: <code>TopLevel</code> (e.g., bare <code>PkK</code> as top-level descriptor), <code>TapLeaf</code> (e.g., <code>Multi</code> instead of <code>MultiA</code> inside a tap leaf), <code>MultiBody</code> (non-key tag appearing where the multi-family raw kiw-bit index stream is expected). Decoder enforces the <code>TopLevel</code> check at <code>decode_payload</code>; raised when the root tag is outside the wrapper-tag allow-list <code>{Sh, Wsh, Wpkh, Pkh, Tr}</code> (since v0.31.0). <code>TapLeaf</code> is covered by the narrower <code>ForbiddenTapTreeLeaf</code> for BIP-342 leaf restrictions; <code>MultiBody</code> is structurally unreachable in v0.30+ encodings.
|-
| <code>NUMSSentinelConflict</code> || Inside <code>tr()</code> body: <code>is_nums = 0</code> with <code>key_index ≥ n</code>. (Field name is historical from the v0.18 sentinel design; v0.30 surfaces the same logical condition under the explicit-flag encoding.)
|-
| <code>DecodeRecursionDepthExceeded { depth, max }</code> || Recursion depth ≥ 128.
|-
| <code>PlaceholderIndexOutOfRange { idx, n }</code> || Key index ≥ <code>n</code> in non-<code>tr()</code> context (or in any <code>idx</code> field of a multi-family body / TLV entry).
|-
| <code>PathDepthExceeded { got, max }</code> || Path depth exceeds the `MAX_PATH_COMPONENTS = 15` cap. Encoder-side: the 4-bit depth field cannot represent a depth above 15, so a conformant encoder raises this before serialization; a decoder reading that field can never observe an out-of-range depth (§"origin-path-encoding"). Likewise <code>KeyCountOutOfRange</code>, <code>AltCountOutOfRange</code>, and <code>ChunkCountOutOfRange</code> guard <code>x−1</code>-coded fields whose wire range is already bounded, so they too are encoder-side checks.
|-
| <code>KGreaterThanN { k, n }</code> || Multi-family or Thresh body decoded with <code>k > n</code>.
|-
| <code>TlvOrderingViolation { prev, current }</code> || TLV entries in non-ascending tag order.
|-
| <code>ChunkSetIdMismatch { expected, derived }</code> || After reassembling a chunked payload, the chunk-set-id declared by the chunks doesn't match the SHA-256-derived id of the reassembled payload.
|}

====Decoder canonical-form validators====

Beyond the structural errors above, a conformant decoder enforces the following canonical-form rules on a decoded payload. They are additive acceptance rules — a good-faith encoder never violates them — and the reference implementation runs them in <code>crates/md-codec/src/validate.rs</code>. Cross-implementations MUST apply equivalent checks so the accepted set matches.

{| class="wikitable"
! Rule (error variant) !! Trigger
|-
| <code>PlaceholderNotReferenced { idx, n }</code> || Some <code>@i</code> with <code>0 ≤ i < n</code> never appears in the tree.
|-
| <code>PlaceholderFirstOccurrenceOutOfOrder { expected_first, got_first }</code> || The first occurrences (pre-order) of distinct placeholder indices are not in ascending order <code>@0, @1, @2, …</code>.
|-
| <code>MultipathAltCountMismatch { expected, got }</code> || The shared use-site multipath and any per-<code>@N</code> override multipath groups do not all share the same alternative count. (A <code>None</code>-multipath entry is a legal divergent structure and is skipped, not rejected.)
|-
| <code>BaselineUseSiteOverride { idx }</code> || A <code>UseSitePathOverrides</code> entry keyed on <code>@0</code> — the baseline cannot be overridden.
|-
| <code>RedundantUseSiteOverride { idx }</code> || A <code>UseSitePathOverrides</code> entry whose path equals the baseline — a redundant (non-canonical) override.
|-
| <code>ForbiddenTapTreeLeaf { tag }</code> || A tap-script leaf whose tag is in the forbidden set <code>{wpkh, tr, wsh, sh, pkh, multi, sortedmulti}</code> — none of these are BIP-342 tapscript leaves (use <code>multi_a</code> / <code>sortedmulti_a</code> inside a tap leaf).
|-
| <code>MissingExplicitOrigin { idx }</code> || A non-canonical wrapper (§"Elided origins and canonical-default paths") with an elided (depth-0) origin for some <code>@N</code> and no explicit origin supplied via the path declaration or an <code>OriginPathOverrides</code> entry.
|-
| <code>InvalidXpubBytes { idx }</code> || A <code>Pubkeys</code> TLV entry whose 33-byte compressed-pubkey field (bytes 32..65) does not parse as a valid secp256k1 point. (The 32-byte chain-code prefix is unvalidated.)
|-
| <code>OverrideOrderViolation { prev, current }</code> || Sparse-TLV <code>(idx, …)</code> entries not in strictly-ascending <code>idx</code> order.
|-
| <code>EmptyTlvEntry { tag }</code> || A present sparse TLV that carries no <code>(idx, value)</code> pairs (encoders MUST omit empty TLVs).
|}

===Decoder reporting===

For every decode attempt, decoders SHOULD report:

{| class="wikitable"
! Field !! Values !! Notes
|-
| Outcome || clean / substitution-corrected / failed || Recommended
|-
| Errors corrected || integer 0–N, with positions || Recommended when applicable
|-
| Correction method || which technique succeeded || Recommended
|-
| Verification status || which post-decode checks passed || Recommended (chunk-set-identifier check for multi-chunk decodes; seed-derived xpub match if performed)
|}

'''Confidence tiers are informative and not yet implemented.''' A future revision MAY add a confidence ladder (e.g. Confirmed / High / Probabilistic / Failed), where "Confirmed" would require ALL of: BCH decode succeeded with at most 4 substitutions corrected, chunk-set identifier verified (if multi-chunk), every <code>@i</code> matched the user's seeds at the recovered paths, and explicit user confirmation of the recovered structure; lower tiers would carry qualifiers identifying which guarantees did not hold. The reference decoder does not currently report confidence tiers, nor the <code>erasure-corrected</code> / <code>structure-aided</code> outcomes (they depend on the future erasure and guided-recovery work — FOLLOWUP <code>impl-confidence-tier-reporting-md-mk</code>).

===Guided recovery===

A guided recovery flow is '''RECOMMENDED''' (SHOULD) for an MD tool, but it is '''not yet implemented''' by the reference implementation, which performs BCH substitution-error correction only. The flow described here is '''informative''' — a design sketch for future work (FOLLOWUP <code>impl-guided-recovery-md-mk</code>, with its erasure-decoding dependency <code>impl-bch-erasure-decoding-md-mk</code>). When implemented it combines BCH ECC, erasure decoding, user-supplied structural knowledge, and seed-derived xpub verification to recover damaged backups.

When implemented, the flow would proceed through these stages, in order:

# '''Damage assessment.''' Accept the user's transcribed string(s). Display per-position character status. Allow user to mark positions as unreadable (erasures).
# '''Standard decode.''' Attempt BCH decoding with no user input. If successful, report and stop.
# '''Erasure-aware decode.''' If standard decode fails and erasures are marked, attempt erasure decoding (up to 8 erasures per string). If successful, report and stop.
# '''Structure elicitation.''' If decoding still fails, prompt the user for structural information they remember about the policy: wallet kind, key count, threshold, derivation path, timelock values, chunk-set identifier (if separately stamped).
# '''Constrained candidate search.''' Encode the user's structural assertions as a partial bytecode template. Enumerate candidate codewords within an extended Hamming radius (up to ~12) that decode to valid MD bytecode AND match the user's assertions.
# '''Candidate verification.''' For each surviving candidate, derive xpubs from available seeds at the candidate's declared paths, verify they map to the expected placeholders, verify the chunk-set identifier if multi-chunk, and reject candidates failing any check.
# '''Optional blockchain verification.''' With explicit user consent, derive the candidate's first N receive addresses and check on-chain history. Disclose privacy implications before this step.
# '''Result presentation.''' Display the recovered wallet policy in BIP 388 form, the Policy ID, derived xpubs, and the confidence level per "Decoder reporting".

A tool that implements the optional blockchain-verification stage MUST disclose privacy implications before any blockchain query, SHOULD default to offline operation, and MUST NOT transmit recovered policy material to external services without explicit user consent.

==Rationale==

===Why a new format?===

Existing engravable formats (BIP 39, codex32) target seeds (uniformly random fixed-length entropy). Neither has framing for arbitrary structured data, and neither encodes wallet structure. Bytewords / UR encodes descriptors but with weak (CRC32) error correction and verbose output. <code>descriptor-codec</code> compactly encodes descriptors but produces raw bytes designed for QR/NFC, not engraving. No existing format combines a compact descriptor encoding with strong BCH error correction in a hand-transcribable form. MD fills this gap.

===Why codex32-derived encoding?===

Codex32 (BIP 93) is purpose-built for hand-transcribed bitcoin secrets. Its bech32 alphabet excludes visually confusable characters; its BCH polynomials provide strong error correction with mathematically guaranteed bounds; reference implementations exist; the encoding scheme is well-reviewed.

However, codex32's HRP is fixed to <code>ms</code> and its header structure is hard-coded for BIP 32 master seeds (Shamir threshold and identifier fields). Codex32 has no extensibility mechanism for non-seed payloads. MD therefore reuses codex32's '''cryptographic primitives''' (alphabet, BCH polynomials) but defines its own HRP and header structure, treating codex32 as a building block rather than a host format. This is consistent with how BIP 350 (bech32m) reused BIP 173's primitives with a different generator constant.

===Why a new HRP?===

A new HRP (<code>md</code>) is required because:
* Codex32's <code>ms</code> HRP cannot be reused without breaking codex32's seed-payload semantics.
* The bech32 checksum is computed over the HRP, providing domain separation: a damaged MD string cannot be misinterpreted as a bech32 address or codex32 seed share.
* The HRP serves as format self-identification for human readers and parsers.

The two-character HRP <code>md</code> was chosen as a compact, readable abbreviation of "Mnemonic Descriptor". It was verified clean against the SLIP-0173 registry, Lightning HRPs, Liquid sidechain HRPs, Codex32 (<code>ms</code>), Nostr NIP-19 HRPs, and Cosmos chain HRPs prior to adoption.

===Why new target constants?===

The target residue constant <code>T_REGULAR</code> is derived NUMS-style ("Nothing Up My Sleeve") as a truncation of <code>SHA-256("shibbolethnums")</code> to the most significant 65 bits, interpreting the hash as a big-endian 256-bit integer. (MD has only the regular code; the long code was removed, so no <code>T_LONG</code> is defined.)

The string <code>shibbolethnums</code> combines this proposal's working name during early development with the conventional <code>nums</code> suffix used in cryptographic constructions to indicate that the value was chosen via a public hash and not through opaque selection. The string itself is the audit trail: any reader can recompute the SHA-256 and verify that the constant follows from it.

We chose a new constant rather than reusing BIP 93's <code>MS32_CONST</code> value for two reasons. First, although the HRP-mixing recipe (BIP 173 <code>hrp_expand</code>) produces residues that differ between any two HRPs sharing this polynomial, picking a distinct target constant provides residue-level separation as well: damage that maps an MD string toward codex32-style validity is statistically prevented by the combination. Second, signaling matters — reusing codex32's specific target constant verbatim would invite the misreading that MD is "codex32 with a different HRP" rather than a distinct format that borrows codex32's polynomial.

The constant is reproducible by any SHA-256 implementation:

<source lang="python">
import hashlib
h = hashlib.sha256(b"shibbolethnums").digest()
T_REGULAR = int.from_bytes(h, 'big') >> (256 - 65)  # = 0x0815c07747a3392e7
</source>

===Why descriptor-codec for the bytecode?===

<code>descriptor-codec</code> is a public-domain (CC0-1.0) Rust library that encodes BIP 380 output descriptors using a compact tag-based format with claimed 30–40% size reduction relative to plaintext. Its tag table covers all miniscript fragments and produces deterministic round-tripping bytecode. MD adopts the same tag-based approach and extends it with BIP 388 wallet-policy framing (<code>@i</code> placeholders) and bit-aligned origin / use-site path declarations. MD's v0.30 tag table is its own 6-bit primary tag space (§"Tag table"; authoritative source <code>crates/md-codec/src/tag.rs</code>) — it does not carry a path dictionary (§"origin-path-encoding") and is not byte-compatible with descriptor-codec's byte-aligned tags.

This design choice means: (a) MD does not invent a new bytecode for descriptors that are already correctly handled by an existing public-domain implementation; (b) implementations of MD that wish to also handle inline-key descriptors (a v1+ extension) can do so by adopting the existing reserved tags; (c) the MD extensions MAY be upstreamed into <code>descriptor-codec</code> if the maintainer accepts.

===Why the BIP 388 placeholder framing instead of inline keys?===

The placeholder framing has three advantages over inline keys:

# '''Compactness.''' Each <code>@i</code> reference encodes as an inline <code>key_index</code> field of just <code>kiw = ⌈log₂(n)⌉</code> bits (0–5 bits for up to 32 keys, §"Key references"), versus the ~65-byte on-wire xpub an inline key would need. For a 6-key policy this saves hundreds of bytes of bytecode — the difference between fitting one engraved plate and fitting many.
# '''Separation of structure from key material.''' The Template Card contains zero key material in v0; it can be backed up independently of seeds and xpub cards. Loss or compromise of a Template Card does not compromise key secrecy.
# '''Standard alignment.''' BIP 388 already defines the placeholder framing for hardware-signer wallet-policy registration. Aligning MD's bytecode with BIP 388's framing minimizes work for wallets that already produce BIP 388 wallet policies.

===Why is guided recovery recommended rather than mandated?===

The format's robustness story has two layers: BCH substitution-error correction (always present, and implemented) and structure-aware recovery (a design sketch — §"Guided recovery"). An earlier draft made guided recovery a conformance MUST, but the reference implementation does not yet provide it, so a MUST would render the reference non-conformant with its own spec. Guided recovery is therefore RECOMMENDED (SHOULD) and described as future work. If adopted broadly it would give MD tools consistent recovery semantics so users with damaged backups are not at the mercy of which tool they happen to use. See FOLLOWUPs <code>impl-guided-recovery-md-mk</code> and <code>impl-bch-erasure-decoding-md-mk</code>.

===Why no compression?===

The format already provides large implicit compression via the placeholder mechanism and tag-based encoding (~40× compression on key material vs inline xpubs; ~10× on operator names vs plaintext). For payload sizes typical of bitcoin wallet policies (≤ 60 bytes), generic compression (LZ-family) yields 5–20% additional savings — offset by dictionary overhead, decompressor complexity, and increased attack surface.

Hardware signers parsing MD-encoded policies (Coldcard, BitBox, Jade, Ledger) have memory and code-size constraints that favor direct opcode interpretation over compressed input. The chunking scheme handles arbitrary lengths, so compression's primary benefit (avoiding chunk boundaries) is moot.

If a future revision identifies compression as worth adding, it should be: (a) a dictionary of common timelock values; (b) an n-of-n implicit-thresh opcode for long <code>and_v</code> chains. Generic LZ on bytecode is not recommended.

===Why no built-in encryption?===

The Template Card contains no key material in v0; it encodes wallet structure. A finder of a Template Card learns the spending policy (e.g., timelock periods, threshold counts, the existence of cosigners) but cannot derive any private keys without also obtaining the user's seed(s).

Encrypting the Template Card is technically straightforward but introduces a new failure mode: loss of the encryption key separate from loss of the seed. Since the Template Card is already useless without the seed for actual fund recovery, the privacy gain from encryption (concealing wallet ''structure'') trades against the recovery risk (now requiring two independent secrets).

A future revision MAY define an optional encrypted Template Card variant. v0 does not include one.

===Why mandatory chunk-set identifier in chunked cards?===

Without per-chunk-set identifiers, a user with multiple wallets risks mixing chunks from different Template Cards during reassembly. The 20-bit identifier provides ~1-in-1M discrimination against accidental cross-wallet contamination, and because every chunk header carries the same CSI, mismatched chunks are rejected before any payload reassembly is attempted.

The 20-bit value is normatively derived from the encoding's <code>Md1EncodingId</code> (see §"Header") rather than drawn from a CSPRNG. This serves two purposes. First, it makes md1 bit-reproducible: two conforming encoders given the same canonical bytecode produce identical Template Card strings down to the wire bits, which lets downstream toolchains (engraving toolkits, regression-pinned vector corpora) SHA-pin md1 outputs without flake. Second, the deterministic binding doubles as the cross-chunk integrity check: decoders re-derive the CSI from the reassembled payload's <code>Md1EncodingId</code> and reject if it differs from the wire CSI carried in chunk headers. The v0.30 wire format does NOT carry a separate cross-chunk hash field — the CSI derivation IS the integrity check, and a non-conforming encoder that drew a random CSI value would produce strings unreadable by conforming decoders, so the determinism contract is self-enforcing.

For single-string Template Cards, no chunk-set identifier is needed because there are no chunks to confuse.

==Frequently Asked Questions==

===Why does MD warn on legacy P2SH multisig?===

BIP 388 admits six top-level wallet-policy shapes — <code>pkh(KEY)</code>, <code>wpkh(KEY)</code>, <code>sh(wpkh(KEY))</code>, <code>wsh(SCRIPT)</code>, <code>sh(wsh(SCRIPT))</code>, <code>tr(KEY[, TREE])</code> — plus legacy <code>sh(multi(...))</code> / <code>sh(sortedmulti(...))</code>. MD '''decodes''' all of them (recovery-first; §"Top-level descriptor scope"), but its encoder emits a warn-only advisory for legacy P2SH multisig and treats <code>pkh</code> as low marginal value. The reasons:

# '''Address-prefix ambiguity is a recovery footgun.''' Both <code>sh(multi(K, ...))</code> (legacy P2SH multisig, 2014–2017 era) and <code>sh(wsh(...))</code> (BIP 48/1' modern nested-segwit multisig) produce <code>3...</code> addresses. A user cannot disambiguate them from an address alone; engraving the wrong type derives the wrong addresses on recovery. The encode-time advisory surfaces this the moment a legacy card is minted, while the decoder still reads such a card so an already-engraved backup is never stranded.
# '''Engravable steel backup adds little for legacy single-sig.''' BIP 39 seed words alone reconstruct a <code>pkh(KEY)</code> wallet; the policy template adds no recovery information. So <code>pkh</code> is fully supported (and ships in the corpus) but the encoder emits no advisory — the value proposition simply does not apply.
# '''Little new pre-segwit deployment.''' Modern hardware wallets emit post-segwit forms by default; realistic users engraving 2015-era P2SH multisig are few.

This is a deliberate '''encode-time''' safety signal, not a decode-time refusal: a spec-conforming recovery tool reads every legitimately-engraved card, and refusing to decode a legacy form would strand funds.

===Why is multi-leaf TapTree deferred (vs excluded)?===

(Historical context — v0.4 deferral rationale.) <code>tr(KEY, TREE)</code> with multi-leaf TapTree (BIP 388 §"Taproot tree") is a substantive feature requiring its own design pass: TapTree depth/balancing rules, leaf-wrapper subset re-evaluation (Coldcard tap-leaf subset is currently restrictive), per-leaf miniscript context validation. Deferring to a future MD revision (v0.5+) keeps the v0.4 release focused. Unlike the legacy exclusions above, multi-leaf TapTree IS planned admission.

===Why does v0.5 admit multi-leaf TapTree?===

The v0.4 deferral was scope-driven, not design-driven. Multi-leaf TapTree was always a planned admission target; v0.5 ships it because:

# The BIP 388 modern-segwit surface (closed at v0.4 with <code>wpkh</code>, <code>sh(wpkh)</code>, <code>sh(wsh)</code>) is now stable, freeing engineering bandwidth for the taproot tree work.
# The peek-before-recurse + depth-gate hardening pattern from v0.4's <code>sh(...)</code> restriction matrix transfers directly to <code>TapTree</code>'s recursive framing — the security review surface is small.
# BIP 341's <code>TAPROOT_CONTROL_MAX_NODE_COUNT = 128</code> provides an upstream-defined ceiling that requires no MD-specific tightening, simplifying the spec.
# rust-miniscript's <code>TapTree::leaves()</code> + <code>TapTree::combine</code> APIs make the encoder/decoder a thin shim over upstream's depth-aware tree representation.

v0.5 does NOT broaden the per-leaf miniscript subset — each leaf is admissible on the same terms as v0.4.x's single-leaf <code>tr(KEY, leaf)</code> admits. The <code>validate_tap_leaf_subset</code> gate is unchanged.

===Why is <code>bare(SCRIPT)</code> rejected?===

BIP 388 itself excludes <code>bare(SCRIPT)</code> (pre-2014 raw script output type, no address). MD inherits this exclusion.

===Why no inline xpubs (foreign keys)?===

MD's <code>@i</code> placeholder framing assumes named keys provided separately at recovery time (BIP 388 wallet-policy structure). Inline xpubs (descriptor-codec reserved tags <code>0x24</code>–<code>0x31</code>) would change the recovery model: the engraved card would carry key material, defeating the steel-engravable backup form factor's value (key material is in the seeds, not the engraved card).

===What about <code>tr(KEY)</code> single-sig taproot?===

Single-key taproot (<code>tr(KEY)</code>) and single-leaf taproot (<code>tr(KEY, single-leaf-script)</code>) are both supported and have been since v0.2. As of v0.5, these are degenerate cases of the full multi-leaf admission: single-leaf is simply a tree of depth zero (no <code>TapTree</code> inner node), and keypath-only is an absent script-tree position. The bytecode encoding for both forms is UNCHANGED from v0.4.x — v0.5 is wire-additive, not wire-breaking, for these cases.

===Why is the HRP <code>md</code> rather than something more descriptive?===

Matches the 2-character convention of BIP 93's <code>ms</code> HRP for codex32. Shorter HRPs leave more capacity in the BCH-bounded data part for policy bytecode. The earlier <code>wdm</code> HRP was renamed to <code>md</code> at v0.3.0 — see CHANGELOG.

==Backwards Compatibility==

MD is a new format; there is no prior version to be compatible with.

MD does not conflict with existing standards:

* '''BIP 39 / SLIP 39 / BIP 93 (codex32):''' MD uses a different HRP (<code>md</code> vs <code>ms</code>), so an MD string is never confused with a codex32 seed share. The bech32 checksums are computed over the HRP plus data, providing cryptographic domain separation.
* '''BIP 173 / BIP 350 (bech32 / bech32m addresses):''' MD uses neither <code>bc</code>/<code>tb</code>/<code>bcrt</code> HRPs nor the bech32m generator constant; addresses cannot be confused with MD strings.
* '''BIP 380 (output descriptors):''' BIP 380 descriptors do not contain the <code>@</code> character, so a BIP 380 descriptor cannot be confused with a BIP 388 wallet policy, and neither can be confused with MD-encoded bytecode (which is binary, not a descriptor string).
* '''BIP 388 (wallet policies):''' MD ''encodes'' BIP 388 wallet policies. Round-trip with BIP 388 canonical form is a stated invariant.

MD v0 readers MUST reject MD strings with newer format-version bytes (loud failure; recommend the user obtain a newer MD tool). v1+ readers MUST accept v0 strings (graceful upgrade).

'''Wire-format breaks on the v0.x evolution path.''' Three breaks shape the v0.30 wire format (historical context):

* '''v0.x ≤ 0.9 → v0.10 (path-divergence support).''' v0.x ≤ 0.9 lossily flattened policies with divergent per-<code>@N</code> origin paths to a single shared path, so <code>decode(encode(p))</code> could differ from <code>p</code> for any policy where cosigners derived xpubs from different paths. v0.10 closed that bug by reclaiming bit 3 of the byte-aligned bytecode header as a divergent-paths flag and adding a per-<code>@N</code> path block. Pre-v0.10 decoders rejected v0.10 divergent-paths encodings cleanly via <code>Error::ReservedBitsSet</code>.
* '''v0.x ≤ 0.10 → v0.11 (bit-packed wire-format reset).''' v0.11 replaced the byte-aligned bytecode framing (1-byte header, 1-byte path-decl tags, byte-aligned operator tags) with a packed 5-bit bit stream, eliminating per-section framing tags entirely; fingerprints, xpubs, and per-<code>@N</code> overrides moved into the §"TLV section". The path-divergence fix from v0.10 was preserved (signaled by header bit 4 directly, with no framing tag); see §"Origin path declaration". v0.x ≤ 0.10 decoders could not read v0.11 encodings, and vice versa; the change was a clean break with no compat layer.
* '''v0.x → v0.30 (wire-format redesign).''' v0.30 widens the bytecode primary tag space from 5-bit to 6-bit (5 hash/literal operators promoted to primary), widens the header version field from 3-bit to 4-bit, relocates the chunked-flag to bit 0 of the first 5-bit symbol for in-band auto-dispatch, packs multi-family children as raw kiw-bit indices (no per-child tags), retires the <code>tr()</code> NUMS sentinel in favor of an explicit <code>is_nums</code> flag (restoring <code>kiw = ⌈log₂(n)⌉</code>), and refines the decoder error taxonomy. v0.x payloads fed to a v0.30 decoder raise <code>Error::WireVersionMismatch</code> cleanly per the auto-dispatch trace in §"Auto-dispatch and safe rejection". This is a clean break with no compat layer.

Users who computed PolicyIds on divergent-path policies under v0.x ≤ 0.9 SHOULD re-engrave under v0.10+. Users who recovered policies from v0.x ≤ 0.29 Template Cards SHOULD re-engrave under v0.30; v0.30 decoders cannot read pre-v0.30 encodings.

==Test Vectors==

The v0.30 reference test corpus is defined by <code>crates/md-codec/src/test_vectors.rs::MANIFEST</code> — the single source of truth — and materialized to files under <code>crates/md-codec/tests/vectors/</code> by the <code>md vectors --out &lt;dir&gt;</code> subcommand. Each <code>MANIFEST</code> entry is a <code>Vector</code> struct (<code>name</code>, <code>template</code>, <code>keys</code>, <code>fingerprints</code>, <code>force_chunked</code>, and — added for non-canonical shapes that require an explicit origin — an optional <code>path</code> field). Each vector materializes as '''four''' plain-text files sharing a common stem <code>{name}</code>:

{| class="wikitable"
! File !! Contents
|-
| <code>{name}.template</code> || The input BIP 388 wallet-policy template (e.g., <code>wsh(multi(2,@0/<0;1>/*,@1/<0;1>/*))</code>).
|-
| <code>{name}.descriptor.json</code> || The post-decode AST: a JSON serialization of the <code>Descriptor</code> struct (n, path_decl, use_site_path, tree, tlv).
|-
| <code>{name}.phrase.txt</code> || The md1 string produced by encoding the template (BCH-checksummed codex32 output).
|-
| <code>{name}.bytes.hex</code> || The raw bit-packed payload bytes (hex), pre-codex32-wrap. Used for byte-level cross-implementation checks.
|}

The <code>md vectors --out</code> runner enumerates <code>MANIFEST</code> and writes the four files per vector. For a <code>force_chunked</code> vector, the <code>{name}.phrase.txt</code> file carries an extra leading <code>chunk-set-id: 0x…</code> line before the per-chunk strings (each chunk on its own line). Conformance tests round-trip each vector: <code>encode(template) == phrase</code> and <code>decode(phrase) == descriptor</code>. Independent implementations SHOULD verify against the committed file tuples for the MD version they target.

===v0.30 corpus===

The committed v0.30 corpus carries 10 vectors:

{| class="wikitable"
! Name !! Template !! md1 string
|-
| <code>wpkh_basic</code> || <code>wpkh(@0/<0;1>/*)</code> || <code>md1yqpqqxqq8xtwhw4xwn4qh</code>
|-
| <code>pkh_basic</code> || <code>pkh(@0/<0;1>/*)</code> || <code>md1yqpqqxzq2qwfv8urt848e</code>
|-
| <code>tr_keyonly</code> || <code>tr(@0/<0;1>/*)</code> || <code>md1yqpqqxqsqgprhfjpjaz6d</code>
|-
| <code>sh_wsh_multi</code> || <code>sh(wsh(multi(2,@0/<0;1>/*,@1/<0;1>/*)))</code> || <code>md1yppqqxpsscy96gddy0v67f8tp</code>
|-
| <code>wsh_multi_2of2</code> || <code>wsh(multi(2,@0/<0;1>/*,@1/<0;1>/*))</code> || <code>md1yppqqxppsg2vlumagltz27le</code>
|-
| <code>wsh_multi_2of3</code> || <code>wsh(multi(2,@0/<0;1>/*,@1/<0;1>/*,@2/<0;1>/*))</code> || <code>md1yzpqqxppsgsc8dua4tu0kekyl</code>
|-
| <code>wsh_sortedmulti</code> || <code>wsh(sortedmulti(2,@0/<0;1>/*,@1/<0;1>/*,@2/<0;1>/*))</code> || <code>md1yzpqqxppcgsc9kdmw6d5dp08f</code>
|-
| <code>wsh_with_fingerprints</code> || <code>wsh(multi(2,@0/<0;1>/*,@1/<0;1>/*))</code> + Fingerprints TLV (<code>@0=deadbeef</code>, <code>@1=cafebabe</code>) || <code>md1yppqqxppsg2z7zdatd7aljh7h2lqp277wajaesknu</code>
|-
| <code>wsh_divergent_paths</code> || <code>wsh(multi(2,@0/<0;1>/*,@1/<2;3>/*))</code> (per-<code>@N</code> use-site-path override via TLV 0x00) || <code>md1yppqqxppsg2qknq2zc2ktzhwekmddzh</code>
|-
| <code>wsh_multi_chunked</code> || <code>wsh(multi(3,@0/<0;1>/*,@1/<0;1>/*,@2/<0;1>/*))</code> (chunked envelope demo) || <code>md1fz4awqqpqsgqpsgvyyxqql8saf74dwdyqv</code>
|}

The corpus exercises all top-level descriptor types in MD's admit set, multi-family operators (multi, sortedmulti), the Fingerprints TLV, divergent use-site-path overrides, and the chunked envelope dispatch path. Negative-vector coverage lives in unit tests (<code>crates/md-codec/src/*</code>) and integration tests (<code>crates/md-codec/tests/*</code>) rather than the file-tuple corpus.

===Reference vector walkthroughs===

The §"Bit-layout example" and §"Bit-layout examples" sections above show six v0.30 encodings bit-by-bit. The bytecode hex strings in those walkthroughs are reproducible via the reference CLI: <code>md encode &lt;template&gt; --path &lt;origin-path&gt; &lt;flags&gt;</code> followed by <code>md bytecode &lt;phrase&gt;</code>.

The four committed corpus vectors closest in shape to the bit-layout examples are:

* <code>wsh_multi_2of2</code> — same template family as the §"Bit-layout example" §1, differs in origin path (<code>m</code> vs <code>m/48'/0'/0'/2'</code>; corpus minimizes per-vector path cost).
* <code>wsh_with_fingerprints</code> — same template + TLV family as §"Bit-layout example" §2.
* <code>tr_keyonly</code> — same template family as §"Bit-layout examples" §1 (keypath-only tr).
* <code>wsh_multi_2of3</code> — exercises the multi-family raw-index-packing wire shape at <code>n = 3, kiw = 2</code>.

===Regeneration===

The committed corpus is regenerated by running <code>md vectors --out crates/md-codec/tests/vectors</code>, which rewrites the four-file tuples from a fresh encode pass of <code>src/test_vectors.rs::MANIFEST</code> and pins the BCH checksums. Conformance test runs (the default <code>cargo test</code>) compare the committed bytes against the live encoder output and fail on drift.

==Reference Implementation==

The reference implementation is published at [https://github.com/bg002h/descriptor-mnemonic github.com/bg002h/descriptor-mnemonic] and is:

* Written in Rust, building on <code>rust-miniscript</code>
* Licensed CC0-1.0 to match this specification
* Accompanied by the test vector suite linked above
* Released with the <code>md</code> CLI binary (<code>md encode</code>, <code>md decode</code>, <code>md verify</code>, <code>md inspect</code>, <code>md bytecode</code>, <code>md vectors</code>, <code>md repair</code>, <code>md address</code>, <code>md compile</code>, <code>md gen-man</code>)

==Acknowledgments==

MD builds directly on the work of:

* '''Pieter Wuille''' for miniscript
* '''Salvatore Ingala''' for BIP 388 wallet policies
* '''Russell O'Connor, Pieter Wuille, and others''' for codex32 (BIP 93)
* '''Josh Doman''' for the <code>descriptor-codec</code> tag-based bytecode design
* '''Wizardsardine (Liana team)''' for production miniscript-wallet experience that informed the spec
* '''Coinkite (Coldcard)''' for the hardware-signer constraints that anchor the format's compatibility goals

==References==

* [https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0039.mediawiki BIP 39 — Mnemonic code for generating deterministic keys]
* [https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0093.mediawiki BIP 93 — codex32: Checksummed SSSS-aware BIP32 seeds]
* [https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0173.mediawiki BIP 173 — Base32 address format for native v0–16 witness outputs]
* [https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0350.mediawiki BIP 350 — Bech32m format for v1+ witness addresses]
* [https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0380.mediawiki BIP 380 — Output script descriptors]
* [https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0388.mediawiki BIP 388 — Wallet Policies for Descriptor Wallets]
* [https://bitcoin.sipa.be/miniscript/ Miniscript reference (Pieter Wuille)]
* [https://github.com/joshdoman/descriptor-codec descriptor-codec (Josh Doman)]
* [https://github.com/wizardsardine/liana Liana wallet (Wizardsardine)]

==Copyright==

This document is licensed under the Creative Commons CC0 1.0 Universal license.
